Speaker1	A tendency I’d developed without realizing it.
Speaker1	Cover it up, and it will go away.
Speaker1	As it turned out, 2011 was conducive to cover-ups.
Speaker1	June marked the beginning of the most ambitious construction project we had ever undertaken: an enormous house for my aunt and uncle and their seven children, to be built on a concrete foundation directly across the street from my front door.
Speaker1	The entire frame of the house would go up in the first eleven days—“Push Week”—which were full of scorching sun and ninety-degree temperatures that had us all baking.
Speaker1	Sweat and sunscreen soaked through our clothes, but the work site was alive with the high-pitched buzzing of table saws and the insistent instruction to “Measure twice, cut once!” from the men who’d taken vacation days from work to lead the project.
Speaker1	By the time we installed the roof trusses, we were sunburned down to the last minion and an accident with a framing nailer had sent a cousin to the emergency room—but the frame was up.
Speaker1	Push Week was a success.
Speaker1	Amazingly, there were several unfamiliar faces around the construction site, too.
Speaker1	In an unprecedented turn of events, new members were joining the church at an astonishing rate.
Speaker1	Ten years had passed since Steve and his family had joined Westboro—the only outsiders who had come to stay in the quarter-century I’d been alive—but in the span of just a few months, a flood of new people arrived.
Speaker1	A twenty-something man from the U.K. Another from a suburb of Chicago.
Speaker1	A young woman my age, along with her three children.
Speaker1	And an older couple from rural Kansas who had divorced before joining Westboro.
Speaker1	It was the second marriage for both husband and wife, and—as our sign paraphrased Jesus—DIVORCE + REMARRIAGE = ADULTERY.
Speaker1	Whosoever putteth away his wife, and marrieth another, committeth adultery: and whosoever marrieth her that is put away from her husband committeth adultery.
Speaker1	It seemed impossible that anyone would make such a sacrifice—a happy marriage that had given them two sweet young boys—in order to join our church.
Speaker1	After a lifetime of hostile rejection of our beliefs, we took this sudden profusion of converts as a clear sign that the Lord was with us, and that the end of all things was at hand.
Speaker1	The fruit of the righteous is a tree of life; and he that winneth souls is wise.
Speaker1	My work for the church also expanded during this period.
Speaker1	Most of my mother’s tasks had been reassigned to other church members, and several of them had fallen to me.
Speaker1	In addition to coordinating the creation and publication of our news releases, I was now the keeper of Westboro’s picket schedules, both local and national.
Speaker1	If I had questions, I was to report to my father or Steve, rather than to my mother—still sitting at her desk five feet from mine.
Speaker1	It was a relief to have a degree of freedom from her intense overmanagement, but I could never feel good about it.
Speaker1	I had been taught all my days to honor and obey my mother.
Speaker1	I felt a growing sense of disgust at her shaming, and I wanted desperately not to contribute to it.
Speaker1	Whenever I made or received a call about church matters that my mother had once overseen, I walked out of our office in haste.
Speaker1	I would not cause her more pain with pointed reminders of the position she had lost.
Speaker1	Meanwhile, the unusual success I was finding on Twitter and in the media had caught the attention of the Kansas City Star.
Speaker1	They sent a reporter to Topeka, and I spent many hours during that spring, summer, and fall giving interviews for a profile.
Speaker1	The reporter shadowed me at work and at protests, and came to hear a sermon one Sunday.
Speaker1	He even attended one of our summer birthday parties, watching me play volleyball and sit poolside with my cousins and nieces, happily fielding requests to tame their long hair with French braids.
Speaker1	His questions were typical and without end, and I reflexively responded in the same way to the same pressure I had always felt when representing the church: to present a strong, united front.
Speaker1	To show no weakness.
Speaker1	To never admit—even to myself—that the church could be wrong.
Speaker1	“There’s something wonderfully liberating in the notion that you’re one hundred percent right,” my grandfather often noted with calm and confidence.
Speaker1	It was another conundrum—“mindfucks,” as Grace began to call them—that I wouldn’t see until much later: That we could experience such a deep sense of personal shame and humility, saying with the Apostle Paul that we were the chiefest of sinners, while simultaneously declaring that God had given us the most righteousness and insisting that the world obey our understanding.
Speaker1	Our position was inherently arrogant and full of hubris, but we felt humble.
Speaker1	Between my conversations with the reporter, with all of the new Westboro converts, with outsiders on Twitter, and with C.G.
Speaker1	on the back side of the Words With Friends game board, my growing doubts were crowded out by eternal justification.
Speaker1	My attempts to convince them of our piety served to focus my attention on the aspects of the church that made life there so large and extraordinary.
Speaker1	The camaraderie.
Speaker1	The sense of family and belonging.
Speaker1	The wonderful and smart and kind and generous and supportive church members.
Speaker1	And the incredible feeling of being in a large group of people functioning almost seamlessly, as one, doing meaningful work as the earthly representatives of the Creator of all mankind.
Speaker1	We weren’t just holding signs on street corners.
Speaker1	We were preaching the standards of God, “maintaining and defending pure Gospel truth,” as Gramps always said from the pulpit.
Speaker1	The Wars of the Lord.
Speaker1	“I’m here because I want to be here,” I told the Star reporter.
Speaker1	“Because I believe these things.
Speaker1	Because I love these words.”
Speaker1	My regular conversations with C.G.
Speaker1	had ended two months earlier, but he sent me a message the day that the profile was published.
Speaker1	“She has no real friends,” the article read.
Speaker1	“Few acquaintances.
Speaker1	The majority of her outside interactions comes with the people—journalists, mostly—who stop by to profile the family.”
Speaker1	With characteristic brevity, C.G.’s response was a link to a video clip on YouTube.
Speaker1	The farewell scene of Dances with Wolves.
Speaker1	Sitting horseback atop a snowy cliff is a Native American called Wind In His Hair.
Speaker1	He had initially been hostile to the man leaving the tribe via a trail far below the cliff—a white soldier who became known as Dances With Wolves—but now yells out to him in the Lakota language: “Dances With Wolves!
Speaker1	I am Wind In His Hair.
Speaker1	Do you see that I am your friend?
Speaker1	Can you see that you will always be my friend?” Shouting it from the mountaintop, as it were.
Speaker1	My heart soared, and it made me ashamed.
Speaker1	I stifled the feeling as soon as I could, steeling myself with the words that concluded the profile:
Speaker1	“I’m all in.”
Speaker1	In C.G.’s absence, I threw myself back into the work of the church and found an even greater sense of my place within the body.
Speaker1	By visceral instinct more than conscious deliberation, I understood that no force silences doubt as effectively as zeal—a passionate clinging to familiar and reliable truths that quiets dissonance and snuffs out uncertainty in an avalanche of action.
Speaker1	I was eager to be useful to fellow church members in every way that I could, and my obedience was rewarded with a deluge of tenderness from my loved ones.
Speaker1	My twenty-sixth birthday arrived in January with a “text bomb”—the coordinated arrival of dozens of messages from church members, all popping up on my screen at once.
Speaker1	My mother had implemented the practice for Westboro birthdays a few years earlier, but the outpouring of love was overwhelming this time.
Speaker1	The message from my dear friend and cousin Jael began: “Dear MegHeart, I have never known a better friend than you.”
Speaker1	From my beloved Gran: “Dear little Meg, you have always been a sweet, precious child; & for many years, a faithful & loving servant to our Lord!
Speaker1	Gramps & I love you very much!
Speaker1	Happy Birthday!
Speaker1	You are GREATLY blessed!” She was eighty-six, but had learned to use emojis on her iPhone, her message sprinkled with happy faces and flowers and musical notes.
Speaker1	My mother wrote the story of my life in a series of tweets, which I copied into a Field Notes, fixing her typos as I always did:
Speaker1	Twenty-six years ago, God loaned us a baby girl.
Speaker1	She’s comforted us always.
Speaker1	We had great hopes for her and called upon the Lord for wisdom to teach her.
Speaker1	Her dad and I had only ONE hope for her: That she would have a tender heart from God, toward Him and His word, and that she would serve His people!
Speaker1	God moved us to sanctify her in her comings and goings, and to teach her line upon line and precept upon precept all of His counsel and ways.
Speaker1	Our little @MeganPhelps has evidence of grace from God and loving kindness, showing a work of God upon her heart, causing obedience to God.
Speaker1	One more tweet on the early days of @MeganPhelps on her God-appointed path: The HUGE happy personality is still with us!
Speaker1	And Grace:
Speaker1	26 years ago, @MeganPhelps was born.
Speaker1	I am above all blessed to have her as my sister, friend, counselor, teacher, +, +, +.
Speaker1	Boaz said to Ruth, “… for all the city of my people doth know that thou art a virtuous woman…” The same can be said of @MeganPhelps.
Speaker1	Accompanying Grace’s tweet was a birthday gift on the same theme: a painting based on an album cover I loved, from a band called “Sons of an Illustrious Father.” Grace had replaced the name of the band with a new one: “Daughters of a Virtuous Mother,” in the radiant colors of sunset.
Speaker1	It was beautiful, but I sensed in this gift a small act of defiance, too: unqualified praise of our mother, who was still an object of scrutiny and judgment by church members.
Speaker1	Though I felt confident in condemning the whole world, the pronouncements of the church were sacrosanct and I had always been terrified of contradicting them in any way.
Speaker1	For rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and stubbornness is as iniquity and idolatry.
Speaker1	But in that moment, my sister’s subversion lit me from within.
Speaker1	She was defending our mother.
Speaker1	And she was not afraid.
Speaker1	As the months ticked by, my vague hope that life would eventually return to some sense of normalcy began to dissolve.
Speaker1	The shaming of my mother continued into the spring and summer of 2012, more than a year after it had begun.
Speaker1	The church was caught in another incident of lies and Photoshop, and it became an international news story that we had pretended to protest Whitney Houston’s funeral.
Speaker1	After this fiasco, and at the risk of getting ourselves into more trouble with our father, Grace and I were finally able to convince him to represent our concern to the rest of the elders.
Speaker1	They agreed to end the public lies and manipulated photos, but only because they were deadlocked about the issue: four of them were against it, but four had no qualms.
Speaker1	I was relieved that they had decided against continuing the practice, but I simply could not fathom that half of the elders saw nothing wrong with it.
Speaker1	Somehow, the situation deteriorated further still.
Speaker1	A cousin of mine, then a woman in her early thirties, admitted to committing fornication and other sins, and she was ostracized and isolated by the church for months.
Speaker1	The elders deemed her unrepentant.
Speaker1	Just before the church-wide meeting that was to be her final warning from the congregation, I spoke with my brother Sam.
Speaker1	I explained to him that I hadn’t been allowed to speak with our cousin for nearly half a year, and that I had no way of knowing the state of her heart and mind.
Speaker1	She and I were both members of the church, and didn’t I have a duty to love one another with a pure heart fervently?
Speaker1	But on the elders’ command, I hadn’t even spoken to her.
Speaker1	I told Sam that I needed to actually interact with her to know how she was.
Speaker1	“You mean, ‘trust, but verify’?” Sam scoffed.
Speaker1	He shook his head dismissively.
Speaker1	“Nah.” He made it clear that I just had to take the elders’ word for it and accept their judgment that she was unrepentant.
Speaker1	This was the clearest repudiation yet of the unanimity called for in Scripture.
Speaker1	I was stunned.
Speaker1	We walked across the backyard in the cool air of late April—almost a year exactly after that email to my parents—and joined the meeting in the church sanctuary.
Speaker1	My cousin pleaded sorrow and repentance for her misdeeds, and I heard true shame and sincerity in her voice.
Speaker1	The elders were unmoved.
Speaker1	The meeting quickly became a campaign to exclude her that very night, in spite of the fact that three church members spoke up in her defense.
Speaker1	I was grateful when one elder voiced the same objection that I had: that my cousin had not been given the biblically required third and final warning from the church body—her last opportunity to demonstrate repentance.
Speaker1	All of her defenders were overruled.
Speaker1	“You need to be instructed in this matter,” one of my uncles said with stomach-turning condescension.
Speaker1	After thirty-odd years at Westboro, my cousin was kicked out of the church, her home, her family, and her life—all in violation of the very Scriptures we claimed to champion.
Speaker1	My sisters’ responses to these events reflected the internal struggle I was experiencing.
Speaker1	For many years, my perspective had been much aligned with Bekah’s.
Speaker1	We both felt a deep sense of inferiority when it came to matters of Scripture, and we were willing to yield to the judgment of older church members—even in cases where we at first felt discomfort or disagreement.
Speaker1	The church had taught us to distrust our own judgment from the time we were children, and we had taken the verses to heart.
Speaker1	The heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked: who can know it?
Speaker1	When I spoke with Bekah about the doubts I was having, she responded in the same way that I always had: to see herself as insufficiently spiritual to question the wisdom of the elders.
Speaker1	“We must be missing something,” she would say.
Speaker1	“The elders must know something we don’t.” She trusted them, but little by little, my trust was eroding and withering.
Speaker1	I wanted to believe Bekah, but for the first time in my life, I couldn’t shut off the questions running through my mind.
Speaker1	I couldn’t identify the source of my new willingness to challenge the church, but I wanted it to go away.
Speaker1	I wanted the simplicity of my old position—“trust and obey”—but it was proving elusive no matter how many times Bekah inspired me to reach for it.
Speaker1	Grace was another matter entirely.
Speaker1	She had always had a unique role in the Phelps-Roper family, and I’d watched her grow into it with joy.
Speaker1	As the seventh child of eleven, Grace tended to have fewer of the more mundane household responsibilities, because those generally fell to the older ones of us.
Speaker1	Instead she had more free time and fun projects: arranging creative portrait sessions for other families in the church, painting street addresses onto the curb outside each Westboro home, and entertaining our little brothers.
Speaker1	She was full of mischief and dubbed the “Pied Piper” by our mother, because the four youngest boys would follow her anywhere—including into the girls’ bathroom on one memorable occasion.
Speaker1	Whereas Bekah and I were regarded as submissive and obedient, Grace’s free spirit and apparent lack of discipline earned her a reputation in the church as willful and coddled.
Speaker1	It was a branding I considered undeserved: though it appeared that Grace’s daily tasks were more distraction than discipline, she was doing all that our parents required of her.
Speaker1	I felt motherly toward all my youngest siblings, each of whom I had read to and sung to and rocked to sleep when they were small, but Grace would always be special to me.
Speaker1	She was the youngest of us three sisters in a family full of boys, and her name suited her well: she was graceful both in features and manner.
Speaker1	My sister’s beauty and charm could be almost unnerving at times, though we never spoke of such things in our home.
Speaker1	Any discussion of beauty was limited to an oft-quoted admonition about its emptiness.
Speaker1	Favour is deceitful, and beauty is vain: but a woman that feareth the Lord, she shall be praised.
Speaker1	It was hard for me to hear the way our aunts and uncles impugned Grace’s obedience, and I became her champion of sorts, subtly pushing back against their disparaging words.
Speaker1	I wouldn’t realize until much later that the protectiveness I felt for Grace wasn’t just because she was following the rules.
Speaker1	It was because she was managing to do so without losing herself.
Speaker1	I adored Grace’s creativity and free spirit and the dreams she would so casually mention—of traveling to Paris or Rome to see the sculptures she was studying in art history, or off to Russia, home of Pushkin and Tolstoy.
Speaker1	I loved her dreams even though I knew them to be impossible.
Speaker1	We could never leave the United States and the broad protection of the First Amendment, and the church’s ban on international travel was just one of the innumerable limitations on our lives that I had long ago assimilated.
Speaker1	But because “Grace flies under the radar,” as my parents often noted, she was somewhat insulated from our mother’s watchful gaze and need for submission.
Speaker1	She hadn’t yet been broken.
Speaker1	She’d made it to age nineteen with her will intact, and she was the only person with whom I could speak openly about my concerns—the only one willing to express disagreement with the elders’ positions without including the standard caveat: “The elders know better.
Speaker1	We must be missing something.”
Speaker1	Neither of us was prepared when Grace became their next target.
Speaker1	“Megan!”
Speaker1	Grace urgently called me to her room early one morning in late May, and I found her on her bed looking panic-stricken and ready to vomit.
Speaker1	She was hysterical, telling me she had just received a call from the wife of one of the new Westboro converts.
Speaker1	Justin and Lindsey [names changed] were about my age.
Speaker1	We saw their conversion as a testimony to the power and sovereignty of God: He had turned their hearts to His truth.
Speaker1	The couple and their baby boy had rented a house from my parents located just a few doors down from ours, and Bekah, Grace, and I visited often.
Speaker1	We liked them immediately and were in awe of their lives and talents.
Speaker1	In contrast to the lives we had led at the church—structured, protected, controlled—theirs had been full of exotic places and experiences.
Speaker1	Their transition in forsaking that worldly life to stand with us on the picket line was mind-blowing to my sisters and me, and we wanted to understand their conversion in every minute detail.
Speaker1	In Lindsey we recognized the same creative energy that animated Grace, and the two bonded over their mutual love of style and art.
Speaker1	Lindsey’s repertoire of skills was broader than my sister’s, and they made plans for Grace to take lessons from her—drawing, painting, sewing.
Speaker1	We would have dinner together, watch movies at their house, and stand together on the picket line in Topeka, Grace and I quizzing them endlessly about their life before Westboro.
Speaker1	The alacrity with which we took to this new family was remarkable, but not unusual.
Speaker1	I wasn’t aware of the pattern at the time, but Grace and I often bonded with outsiders in this way.
Speaker1	We harbored a deep curiosity about the world outside, and we indulged it as much as the constraints of our lives would allow.
Speaker1	She and I would sit on the floor of my room or hers and read books and stories aloud to each other for hours, not just the Bible but everything from Anna Karenina to the fairy tales of Hans Christian Andersen.
Speaker1	When it was Grace’s turn to read, I’d pull my hands through her long, dark waves to detangle and braid them, or massage her scalp in slow, methodical motions, or paint her nails in one of the colors approved by our father—light pink, nude, or clear—while we contemplated the curious lives and ideas of these characters.
Speaker1	Whenever journalists and filmmakers came around for interviews, Grace and I would ask almost as many questions about their lives as they asked about ours, and we grew attached if they spent more than a few hours with us.
Speaker1	On the day that Louis Theroux and the BBC crew departed after three weeks of filming, we exchanged gifts—including baby clothes and blankets for the sound engineer, soon to be a father—and then I retreated into my house to cry in my bedroom.
Speaker1	The four of them had been so kind to us.
Speaker1	I believed their choices would lead them to Hell, but I cared about them.
Speaker1	I didn’t want to say goodbye forever, and it frightened me that I regarded them with such affection.
Speaker1	Love not the world, neither the things that are in the world.
Speaker1	If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him.
Speaker1	But now with Justin and Lindsey, we didn’t have to say goodbye.
Speaker1	They had had as many fascinating experiences as the journalists we encountered, but here there were no limits or constraints.
Speaker1	We didn’t have to keep them at arm’s length, because we were allowed to cultivate friendship with them.
Speaker1	They were part of our community.
Speaker1	They were safe.
Speaker1	All of that ended on the morning of the phone call.
Speaker1	Lindsey had discovered that Grace and Justin had been texting extensively and was convinced that my little sister had designs on her husband.
Speaker1	The two had class together at the university and had grown closer over the course of the semester, conversing often about everything and nothing.
Speaker1	I’d had no idea how frequently they’d been texting, but when I listened to Grace describe the messages, I instantly thought of C.G.
Speaker1	: The discussions never touched on “inappropriate” topics, but the closeness itself felt improper to me.
Speaker1	The fear on my sister’s face twisted my insides, especially since I knew what was coming.
Speaker1	I wanted to defend Grace to our parents and to the elders—“She didn’t know what she was doing!”—but an angry call from a jealous wife was a scandal that couldn’t be smoothed over by a plea of ignorance, no matter how genuine.
Speaker1	It wouldn’t matter to the elders that Grace had seen no distinction between a friendship with an unrelated man and a friendship with one of our cousins.
Speaker1	Why would she?
Speaker1	We had been told all our lives that church members were our family, and that’s how we had always seen them—related or not.
Speaker1	For whosoever shall do the will of my Father which is in heaven, the same is my brother, and sister, and mother.
Speaker1	The same verse that justified cutting our brother Josh out of our family was the one that instructed us to bring these strangers into it.
Speaker1	And more, the fact that Justin was married gave Grace an even greater sense of safety in their closeness.
Speaker1	It was unthinkable that anything improper could happen with him, because he was married.
Speaker1	The line was so bright and crossing it was so far outside the realm of possibility that she simply didn’t believe it could be improper.
Speaker1	Punishment was swift.
Speaker1	Grace was forbidden from having any contact at all with either Justin or Lindsey, not even to apologize.
Speaker1	Instead of chasing after children as she did every summer, Grace would be required to take a temp job at the Kansas Department of Revenue, sitting at a desk doing data entry work for eight hours each day.
Speaker1	My siblings and I would no longer be permitted to spend time with Justin and Lindsey, but instead would avoid them—except that we could say hello if we happened to pass them at church on Sundays.
Speaker1	Because Lindsey had not asked to be baptized since she’d arrived six months earlier, the elders decided that it was time to isolate her from the rest of the church.
Speaker1	She was a negative influence.
Speaker1	“What makes her any different than the rest of these heathen, except that she’s related to a member of the church?
Speaker1	That doesn’t confer any special benefits to her.”
Speaker1	New restrictions kept coming, growing increasingly draconian all the time.
Speaker1	Sam and Steve had never approved of Grace’s freewheeling spirit, and they encouraged my father to rein her in.
Speaker1	It seemed to anger both men that Grace had opinions and that she was willing to ignore their advice—even when the smallest issues were implicated.
Speaker1	Two years earlier, Grace and I had decided to switch to Apple computers.
Speaker1	Steve advised against it, and I yielded to his recommendation immediately and without complaint.
Speaker1	Grace, on the other hand, thanked him for his input and explained that she would be getting a Mac.
Speaker1	Steve pestered my parents for weeks afterward, strenuously arguing that his reasons for remaining with the status quo were worth following.
Speaker1	It had seemed embarrassing at the time, because it was clear that Steve only cared about the issue because he wanted to be obeyed.
Speaker1	My mother eventually came up with an excuse for why it had to be a Mac (“It will help Isaiah learn another operating system for his job!”), and though I didn’t care about the computer either way, I was glad that my parents had pushed back against Steve’s bullying.
Speaker1	But my father couldn’t really do that anymore.
Speaker1	His judgment had been so severely called into question by the church that he had seemed unwilling to trust himself—or my mother—ever since.
Speaker1	Instead he listened and followed the recommendations of his fellow elders, even when they were contrary to his instincts.
Speaker1	Most of these new rules had no specific foundation in Scripture—just a reference to a broad passage calling believers to abstain from all appearance of evil.
Speaker1	When Sam and Steve learned that Grace was using her required twenty-minute work break to explore the area around her downtown office building, they prompted my father to forbid it.
Speaker1	He did.
Speaker1	The appearance of evil.
Speaker1	She began spending those breaks sitting on the couch in the twelfth-floor bathroom.
Speaker1	When Grace asked to take our brothers to a park to climb trees, our father forbade that, too—not just on that day, but ever.
Speaker1	That Grace would request such a silly thing was taken as evidence that her heart wasn’t in the right place.
Speaker1	The appearance of evil.
Speaker1	When our father instructed Grace to choose a degree other than art, Sam and Steve advised him that he hadn’t gone far enough—that her options should be limited to the study of nursing or computers only.
Speaker1	The fact that both of those studies were anathema to my sister was almost the point.
Speaker1	In the words and actions of these men I could not help but see that, above all else, their desire was to break her spirit.
Speaker1	Any comfort she found in her old ways—exploring and adventuring, even within the extreme confines of our sheltered lives—had to be taken from her.
Speaker1	It was as if that phone call from Lindsey had given them an excuse to impose upon Grace every unreasonable limit they could dream up in order to quench her spirit.
Speaker1	It was as if they were saying, “You see what happens when you let a young woman have her way?”