Speaker1	Unless you counted the various plots hatched by quarreling children, the block had never been a place for nefarious schemes.
Speaker1	It was a place for us—for pool parties and trampoline jumping and tennis playing in the summer, and for football and snowball fights and sledding down the little hill behind our garage in the winter.
Speaker1	It’s where I’d sit on the white porch swing with the big canopy, rocking gently with a paperback and a baby sibling propped in the crook of my left arm, the perfect excuse to sit and read for as long as it took Mom to realize that the baby had fallen asleep and tell me to come inside and put him down so I could help clean the kitchen or do the laundry, of which there was no end.
Speaker1	It’s where Dad had taught us how to ride bikes and play croquet when we were kids.
Speaker1	He and the uncles had even built us a BigToy when I was about three, with a rope bridge, scratchy wooden monkey bars that always gave me splinters, and, at the end of the big blue slide, a sandbox we’d once forgotten Isaiah in when he was a toddler.
Speaker1	Mom had driven a van full of us noisy kids all the way to the family law office before we realized he wasn’t in his car seat—and then sped home only to find him busily digging away with his plastic shovel, safe and blessedly unaware of any drama.
Speaker1	More and more as the years had passed, I’d come to see our block in just that way: safe, secure, shielded from anything bad that could possibly happen.
Speaker1	A refuge.
Speaker1	Here there were no counterprotesters to steal our picket signs, no angry passersby to drive their cars at us, no jackboot cops to threaten arrest, and no one around to yell at us except our relatives.
Speaker1	Here there was just same: heat and sticky humidity, the scent of newly mown grass, the insistent buzzing of cicadas, and kids biking around the track I’d been walking laps on since my legs were too stubby to keep up with Mom and her power-walking sisters.
Speaker1	The familiarity of the scene could be like a sedative, and there were times when I’d be hurrying out our back door and just stop in my tracks, staring out into that wide-open space, stalled by the sense of comfort and calm that washed over me.
Speaker1	I felt that calm on the Sunday of my baptism, too.
Speaker1	Among the many mainstream religious traditions condemned by Westboro Baptist Church, infant baptism was a particular iniquity.
Speaker1	Without any hint of hyperbole my grandfather likened it to burning the child alive in sacrifice to a pagan god.
Speaker1	Only believers could be baptized in our church, following the examples of the adults baptized in the New Testament.
Speaker1	The Ethiopian eunuch professed his belief before he was baptized, as infants cannot.
Speaker1	The masses baptized by John the Baptist confessed their sins, as infants cannot.
Speaker1	Even Jesus Christ Himself was baptized as an adult.
Speaker1	Baptism, then, was not a rite of passage at Westboro.
Speaker1	It would only take place if a believer felt called to ask for it, if they believed that they were one of God’s elect—a Jacob, and not an Esau.
Speaker1	They would have to show evidence of an “orderly walk,” obedience to the standards held by the church, and active, eager participation in the work of the church.
Speaker1	A candidate for baptism must speak with every member of the church, and may only be baptized if all members respond with silence when the question is posed: Can any forbid water?
Speaker1	When I turned thirteen and asked to be baptized, no one forbade me.
Speaker1	My mother would be the first to tell you that I could be as willful and goofy as any thirteen-year-old girl, but she kept me on a tight leash, and I was learning.
Speaker1	Earnest and enthusiastic about our beliefs, I zealously pursued the Bible knowledge needed to “defend them against all comers,” as Gramps instructed.
Speaker1	Eight years on the picket line had convinced me that there was nothing in the world of greater significance than this battle for the cause of God and truth, and I was ready to dedicate the rest of my life in service of it.
Speaker1	I’d had a brief crisis of conscience that spring, when I’d been involved in the seventh-grade musical, and when I came out of it, I knew it was time to seek baptism.
Speaker1	School had become a parallel culture to the one I inhabited at home, one that I had long since adapted to.
Speaker1	I knew my classmates saw me as some sort of weird hybrid of a person: a friendly girl who enjoyed helping others with homework on the one hand, but a hateful religious fanatic who believed everyone was going to Hell on the other.
Speaker1	I had friendly acquaintances, and, for the most part, we all compartmentalized my conduct during class from my existence outside of it.
Speaker1	I rarely saw my peers outside of school, but in spending extracurricular time with them each day—sitting around joking about mean teachers, listening to music, doing homework together—I began to wonder: Were my classmates really as bad as I’d been taught?
Speaker1	The question lingered in the back of my mind for a time, but I batted it away as soon as I consciously acknowledged it.
Speaker1	There were only two kinds of people in the world, and my classmates belonged firmly in the Esau category.
Speaker1	They didn’t seem to know or care about the Bible.
Speaker1	Their parents were divorced and remarried.
Speaker1	And some of them were as good as committing fornication already, what with all the hand-holding and kissing they were doing in the hallways.
Speaker1	They might be friendly to me, but these “friends” of mine were enemies of God—and therefore must be my enemies, as well.
Speaker1	Do not I hate them, O Lord, that hate thee?
Speaker1	and am not I grieved with those that rise up against thee?
Speaker1	I hate them with perfect hatred: I count them mine enemies.
Speaker1	During the winter, baptisms were done in the baptismal font in the church sanctuary—essentially a large blue bathtub near the pulpit, typically hidden from view by peach-colored curtains.
Speaker1	Summer baptisms took place in the in-ground pool.
Speaker1	It was about fifty feet long and located just outside Westboro’s rear entrance.
Speaker1	On the afternoon I was baptized, the congregation filed out into that communal space in the blinding noonday sun, and I joined them a moment later, after changing into a white T-shirt and cutoff jeans.
Speaker1	In silence, we all clustered around the shallow end, waiting for my grandfather to emerge.
Speaker1	Three black stripes were painted the length of the pool to identify lanes for lap swims, and when Gramps walked out in a red windbreaker suit and old Nikes, I followed him as he waded to the stripe in the center.
Speaker1	When I was a child, he would stand in just this spot, lift me out of the water as if it cost him no effort at all, and toss me several feet for a big splash, to the place where the bottom of the pool slopes down to the deep end.
Speaker1	And then Bekah.
Speaker1	And then Josh.
Speaker1	My cousins.
Speaker1	Over and over we swam back to him, one after another after another.
Speaker1	Now he stood to my left and motioned for me to use both of my hands to take hold of his left wrist.
Speaker1	He was nearly seventy now, with slight tremors in his hands.
Speaker1	He began with a passage of Scripture: Know ye not, that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ were baptized into His death?
Speaker1	Therefore we are buried with him by baptism into death; that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in newness of life.
Speaker1	He spoke of my profession of faith, and that I’d given evidence of being one of God’s elect.
Speaker1	“I baptize you, my sister…” he declared, but his conclusion was lost to me as he covered my nose and mouth with a white cloth, supported my shoulders with his right hand, and pressed me down into the water.
Speaker1	Five years later, on the morning of my high school graduation, my brother disappeared.
Speaker1	Saturdays were as welcome in my house as they are anywhere, and that one—sunny, warm, breezy—seemed like the perfect start to summer.
Speaker1	Still in pajamas, I was the first of the sisters to slip into the kitchen, which was brightly lit and full of activity.
Speaker1	Several of my younger brothers were seated on bar stools around the island, chattering, munching happily, and swiping bits from each other’s plates.
Speaker1	At two, Luke was the youngest, and his face was deceptively cherubic: he was the one most likely to do the thieving and least likely to tolerate such insolence from anyone else.
Speaker1	Mom was standing over the stove making breakfast—pancakes, maybe, or scrambled eggs—and singing a seventies pop song I’d only ever heard in her soprano.
Speaker1	I heard the huge smile in her voice before I saw it, and when she turned, her eyes caught mine and then she was singing the love song to me, with exaggerated feeling and theatrics at full voice.
Speaker1	I couldn’t help but laugh to see her in such high spirits, because this was one of the places my mom seemed perfectly in her element.
Speaker1	“Where is Josh?” she called over the din.
Speaker1	“It’s getting late!
Speaker1	Would one of you boys run down and wake him up?” My brothers tumbled over themselves to race down to Josh’s basement bedroom.
Speaker1	Moments later, they were thundering back up the stairs, Jonah leading the pack.
Speaker1	“He’s not there!
Speaker1	It’s all gone!” Jonah was seven and a little confused, but not worried.
Speaker1	I wasn’t, either; bizarre declarations were par for the course in a family with eight brothers.
Speaker1	My brow furrowed a little, and I looked to Mom, whose mouth was ajar.
Speaker1	“Would you—”
Speaker1	“I’ll go look,” I said, and headed for the stairs with three little brothers trailing.
Speaker1	There were fourteen steps down, and with each one, more of the stripped basement came into view.
Speaker1	The television was gone, and so was Josh’s beloved Xbox.
Speaker1	The bookcase, too.
Speaker1	No clothes or random knickknacks strewn about.
Speaker1	It had been years since I could see this much of the blue carpet, and I wondered briefly if he’d cleared the place out for the carpet cleaners.
Speaker1	Rounding the corner, I was reassured to see that the dresser was still there and the bed neatly made.
Speaker1	He was probably just in the shower.
Speaker1	The boys flung open the flimsy double doors of his closet, and time slowed down.
Speaker1	The shelves and racks were completely bare.
Speaker1	One of the boys suddenly thrust a white envelope he’d found into my face.
Speaker1	“Go show it to Mom,” I said, waving him on.
Speaker1	They all took off.
Speaker1	I checked the bathroom, just in case.
Speaker1	“Mom and Dad, I didn’t think I would ever be saying this…”
Speaker1	The letter was one page, single-spaced, Times New Roman font, size twelve, dated May 21, 2004.
Speaker1	The day before.
Speaker1	He must have left in the middle of the night.
Speaker1	I knew that meant he was a coward, just like two uncles of ours who had left the family long before either of us was born.
Speaker1	“Slunk away in the dark” is how it was usually put.
Speaker1	It wasn’t often that Mom spoke of her four absentee siblings, but when she did, it was with an edge of disdain.
Speaker1	She didn’t seem hurt by their loss, precisely, instead vacillating between a strident good-riddance attitude, an outraged how-dare-they sense of betrayal, and a but-for-the-grace-of-God-there-go-I pity.
Speaker1	The stories I was told were copious, and they painted clear portraits of the defectors: Kathy, vain and whorish; Nate, a thief and criminally rebellious; Mark, an entitled manipulator; Dot, an idolatrous witch.
Speaker1	As such, their reasons for leaving the church could never be valid—just paltry attempts to mask the fact that they were wretched creatures controlled by their lusts, dastardly, selfish, unable to hack it in the rough and tumble of the Wars of the Lord.
Speaker1	The implication of these tales had always been abundantly clear: these deserters were not like us, and we were better off without them.
Speaker1	We all knew this, but my mother had never been the sort of parent to let a lesson—or anything, really—go unsaid.
Speaker1	Still standing over the stove, she was only quiet for a moment after she read through the letter.
Speaker1	All four little boys were clustered around her, hushed now, waiting to be told what was going on, where Josh’s stuff had gone.
Speaker1	Her tone was sober, and there was finality and resignation in it: “They went out from us, but they were not of us.” She was quoting the Bible, I could tell, but this wasn’t a verse we’d focused on before—not in my memory—and I was as mystified as the boys.
Speaker1	I couldn’t pay attention anymore, though.
Speaker1	My thoughts were racing.
Speaker1	My nineteen-year-old brother had gone apostate.
Speaker1	We’d been together since my birth precisely seventeen months after his, but I’d never see him again.
Speaker1	I’d never speak to him again.
Speaker1	He hadn’t said goodbye.
Speaker1	Why did he leave?
Speaker1	Where did he go?
Speaker1	What was our family without him?
Speaker1	I tried to imagine our house without his near-constant recitation of esoteric movie quotes, and failed.
Speaker1	I tried to imagine our family “Sock War” game without him pelting me with pairs of striped kneesocks, and failed.
Speaker1	I tried to imagine never again standing on the picket line discussing the philosophical questions raised by Stephen King novels, and failed.
Speaker1	I knew that none of this was important, that his departure was the only thing that mattered.
Speaker1	That he was just like Mark and Nate now, and that I should feel about Josh what Mom felt about her departed siblings.
Speaker1	I didn’t, though.
Speaker1	I couldn’t conjure an image of Josh that made him like our degenerate uncles, couldn’t exchange this new picture of him with the one I’d had just the day before, just that morning: my big brother, the one who taught me the cheats and secrets to Super Mario Brothers 3 on Nintendo, my verbal sparring partner and fellow bibliophile, lover of mashed potatoes and abuser of ketchup.
Speaker1	It was impossible to reconcile these two narratives.
Speaker1	“Can I…?”
Speaker1	I reached for the letter, and Mom passed it over.
Speaker1	I read through it once, and then again, hoping repetition would reveal why he’d done this drastic thing.
Speaker1	He had a wide array of complaints—rejections of everything from the church’s picketing ministry to the way our parents ran our household—but at first, none of his grievances made any sense at all.
Speaker1	I paused briefly and reconsidered: I could appreciate some of his grumblings, but none of them was a reason to leave the only known place in the world where God meets with His people.
Speaker1	So what if babysitting our little brothers could be a miserable, thankless job?
Speaker1	So what if he hadn’t been allowed to get an apartment?
Speaker1	I’d been appalled that he’d even asked, frankly.
Speaker1	He was only nineteen!
Speaker1	We were supposed to be at home, taking care of things there.
Speaker1	There was one part, though, that I simply couldn’t fathom.
Speaker1	“We picket these people and they hate us for it and I have had enough of it.”
Speaker1	I shook my head as my eyes traced that line again and again.
Speaker1	I knew there were some difficult parts of the life we’d been living, but being reviled wasn’t one of them.
Speaker1	The fact that people hated us was cause for great happiness.
Speaker1	Jesus Himself said so: Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely, for my sake.
Speaker1	Rejoice, and be exceeding glad: for great is your reward in heaven: for so persecuted they the prophets which were before you.
Speaker1	Gramps always said from the pulpit that “rejoice” meant “leap for joy.”
Speaker1	Dismayed, I set the letter down on the counter.
Speaker1	Maybe Josh really was a coward.
Speaker1	Mom made an announcement on the intercom, and speakers built into walls all over the house rang with her voice calling the family to the living room.
Speaker1	I made my way there, and stared at Josh’s vacant seat while we waited for the stragglers.
Speaker1	Since I had been a child, this was the place where we’d convened as a family at least once a day to read the Bible, talk through family matters, and discuss the church’s interpretation of current events.
Speaker1	This was how my parents kept our household of twelve—eleven, I mentally corrected myself (Sam having moved out a few years earlier)—on the same page, united, working toward common goals.
Speaker1	The couches were hunter green with tiny flowers printed on them, and they were arranged in one big rectangle, an invitation and a signal that each of us should be participating in these discussions.
Speaker1	My parents were sitting at their end of the rectangle, and when everyone was in place, Mom began with the passage she had quoted earlier from First John.
Speaker1	“They went out from us, but they were not of us; for if they had been of us, they would no doubt have continued with us: but they went out, that they might be made manifest that they were not all of us.
Speaker1	Don’t you see, children?
Speaker1	Josh was here, but he was never of us.
Speaker1	We have a promise right here—that if he were of us, he would have continued here with us.
Speaker1	‘No doubt’!
Speaker1	But he did not.
Speaker1	He’s come to years, and he’s decided that he is not going to serve God in truth.
Speaker1	Flip over to Hebrews 10.”
Speaker1	The older ones of us opened our Bibles to the book of Hebrews.
Speaker1	We’d memorized chapter ten during a recent summer, including a particularly terrifying meditation on the fate of those who leave the faith.
Speaker1	It was full of the promised vengeance of God, of judgment and fiery indignation, and a grave warning: It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.
Speaker1	The chapter ends thusly:
Speaker1	But we are not of them who draw back unto perdition; but of them that believe to the saving of the soul.
Speaker1	We are not of them.
Speaker1	Long ago, I had dedicated my life to serving God and His people, and I would not be like Josh and draw back.
Speaker1	I would not follow him to destruction.
Speaker1	They are not of us.
Speaker1	I comforted myself with these words, searching for every distinction I could find, for any shred of evidence that would distinguish me from my Judas of a brother.
Speaker1	Josh was wicked, a coward.
Speaker1	He wanted the praise of the world, he’d said so himself.
Speaker1	He had denied Jesus, trodden underfoot the son of God.
Speaker1	No, I was not like Josh.
Speaker1	My heart was fixed.
Speaker1	I will never leave this place.
Speaker1	A steady stream of visitors poured into our house throughout the day, church members coming to affirm our righteousness and my brother’s wickedness.
Speaker1	Their bitter demonization of him began almost instantly, so quickly that I had to fight hard against my instinct to defend him.
Speaker1	On the picket line that afternoon, I listened as my cousins referred to Josh as a “punk” and a “little bitch” and a dozen other insulting names.
Speaker1	We were planted on the sidewalk in front of the Kansas Expocentre, picketing my graduation ceremony before I headed inside to get my diploma—and though it was still a little strange when my two separate worlds collided, the context of the protest barely registered.
Speaker1	My brother was gone, and it was disquieting to think of how my loved ones would have spoken of him just the day before, the same tender, loving words they were now using to describe those of us who remained.
Speaker1	I furrowed my brow and stayed quiet.
Speaker1	I trusted their judgment far more than my own.
Speaker1	The following day, our family vacation to Colorado went on in Josh’s absence.
Speaker1	The nine-hour drive would be filled with tears both going and coming—even from my dad, the only time I can ever remember seeing him cry.
Speaker1	But from the moment we returned to Topeka one week later, our tears were no longer acceptable.
Speaker1	“We’re gonna make the Lord mad at us if we keep this up,” my mother warned sharply when she came upon me in tears the day after we got home.
Speaker1	“This is from the Lord.
Speaker1	We must be thankful and praise Him for all things, not just what seems good to us.
Speaker1	We have to be in charge of our spirits.
Speaker1	You hear me?”
Speaker1	My mother’s words were shades of a sign that would come many years later—GOD HATES YOUR FEELINGS—and correlated perfectly with a passage she called upon often: Casting down imaginations … and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ.
Speaker1	We were to bring every thought into control and obedience to God, and our mom was going to help us get there.
Speaker1	With great effort I stifled my tears for Josh, but I couldn’t stop thinking about him.
Speaker1	For years, Josh and I had been comrades in discontent, united by the bitterness we felt at the way our mother often treated us—her wavering between incredible kindness and unjustified cruelty.
Speaker1	She could be so very abrasive, provoked into a fit of rage by the smallest infractions: a flash of anger across our face, an edge in our voice, any sign of hesitation or displeasure at what was being required of us.
Speaker1	These were unmistakable signs of rebellion that she simply could not abide, and her lack of patience for our wayward emotions was one of the great hallmarks of our upbringing.
Speaker1	But over time, I’d come to see things differently, in a way that Josh had never seemed to.
Speaker1	I understood our mother’s hardness to be a painful necessity, not unlike our picketing: an expression of love manifesting as a harsh warning against sinful behavior.
Speaker1	That was her duty as a mother.
Speaker1	It was a hard-won perspective, one that I had arrived at only after years of battling with my mom and with myself—but all the while, Josh’s heart had apparently been drawn further and further away.
Speaker1	Take heed, brethren, lest there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief, in departing from the living God.
Speaker1	He was an Esau, our enemy, doomed to eternal destruction.
Speaker1	I felt so sorry for him, and so grateful to have been spared.
Speaker1	As Josh and I had walked through the years of our teenage rebellion, he had missed the lesson that had become so clear to me: that happiness came only through submission—to the people and the circumstances and the limits that God had set for my life.
Speaker1	The bounds of my habitation.
Speaker1	With that realization had come a peace with my mom that I had never thought possible.
Speaker1	Just a few weeks before we lost Josh, she and I had walked in lockstep one afternoon, arm in arm like the close confidantes we had become.
Speaker1	We were picking up Gabe and Jonah from the elementary school—the same one I had escaped to as a child.
Speaker1	The spring sun was so warm on my face and the world was green and coming to life again, and I felt such a surge of joy and gratitude for my place in it that I started to cry.
Speaker1	“Oh, what is it, sweet pea?” Mom asked, rubbing my arm soothingly with her free hand.
Speaker1	“I’m just so content,” I sobbed, clinging to her.
Speaker1	“So happy and so grateful and so content.
Speaker1	I don’t ever want that to change.
Speaker1	I’m so afraid that it will.
Speaker1	I don’t ever want the Lord to be mad at me for being ungrateful for my lot.
Speaker1	I want to always love this life.”
Speaker1	My mother shushed me reassuringly.
Speaker1	“The Lord has blessed you with so many wonderful talents, and you use them to serve Him.
Speaker1	But more importantly, He’s given you a heart to know Him, and to love Him, and to love and serve His people.
Speaker1	All we can do is trust Him and keep doing what He’s put in front of us to do.”
Speaker1	I pushed my sunglasses up and brushed the tears away.
Speaker1	“I love you, little girl.”
