Speaker1	Chapter seven.
Speaker1	Ye Shall Be Judged
Speaker1	It wasn’t just in my mind.
Speaker1	Grace was avoiding me.
Speaker1	Or at least, she was avoiding being alone with me.
Speaker1	She was afraid.
Speaker1	Each time it seemed we would have a chance to speak in private, she made other plans—heading off to read to our little brothers after Bible study in the evenings, or spending her lunch break in the kitchen instead of coming up to my bedroom.
Speaker1	If I was going to the evening pickets, she would find a reason to stay home.
Speaker1	If I was stuck working in the office, she’d grab a sign bag and volunteer to take the boys.
Speaker1	I was in a constant state of attempting to mask my frantic anguish—so many people around, always; surely they could see the sedition in my thoughts?—and the panic was exacerbated by the knowledge that Grace could turn me in at any time.
Speaker1	Only when we were together did I have any sense of relief that she wasn’t reporting me at that very moment.
Speaker1	Why hadn’t I left immediately?
Speaker1	It was C.G.
Speaker1	who’d told me to slow down.
Speaker1	When I re-installed Words With Friends and broached the subject of leaving the church, he warned me that this was not a decision I could make in an instant.
Speaker1	If my existential crisis was just the result of a few squabbles with the new church leadership—if I still believed most of what I had been preaching for decades—then I would not find the world a hospitable place.
Speaker1	Knowing how dedicated I’d been, he said I should think it through.
Speaker1	That I needed to be certain.
Speaker1	I saw the wisdom in C.G.’s advice and would wait to make my decision until I knew for sure.
Speaker1	Still, there were a few things I was certain about, even in those earliest days:
Speaker1	I would not be attending any more funeral protests.
Speaker1	When my family prostrated ourselves after evening Bible readings, my prayers would no longer include curses for our enemies.
Speaker1	I would not be talking to the media, if I could possibly avoid it—there were too many land mines now, and if a reporter stumbled upon one, I knew I wouldn’t be able to hide my misgivings.
Speaker1	And I would not hold any signs that I didn’t believe, or preach anything that I didn’t think was true.
Speaker1	The perpetual motion of the church never ceased, and outwardly I was still completely enmeshed in the flurry of activities that kept Westboro constantly in the news—but inwardly, my doubts were multiplying.
Speaker1	For the first time in my life, I was allowing myself to ponder ideas that I had always instinctively shoved into the darkest corners of my mind.
Speaker1	I felt like I was losing my grip on reality, my thoughts boomeranging back and forth between two extremes: (1) that Westboro was fundamentally right and that my mind was rebelling against God at Satan’s direction, and (2) that the truths we held to be self-evident were entirely questionable, odious, and destructive—both for us and for the people we’d been accosting on the streets for more than two decades.
Speaker1	I became consumed with questions, assaulted by every passing doubt I’d ever had.
Speaker1	It had only been a few days since I’d been painting with Grace in that basement, but troublesome memories now seemed to appear in every quiet moment.
Speaker1	I couldn’t escape them.
Speaker1	Sitting at my grandfather’s computer in the church library—typing Bible verses for one of his sermons—I flashed back to a drive to school one afternoon when I was in college.
Speaker1	It was one of the first warm days that spring, and the windows were down, breeze ruffling my hair as I mulled over a point of doctrine.
Speaker1	I was taking a logic course that semester, and as I pondered the argument, I became vaguely unnerved.
Speaker1	We believed all outsiders hated us.
Speaker1	If they said they hated us, we believed them.
Speaker1	If they said they loved us, we believed they were either lying or delusional, and nothing could persuade us otherwise.
Speaker1	I began to see that for many of our beliefs, there was absolutely no evidence that could be introduced to us that would cause us to change our minds.
Speaker1	Unfalsifiable.
Speaker1	My brows stitched together as I stepped out of the car—and then I had grabbed my bag, never to return to the question again.
Speaker1	Folding laundry with my four youngest brothers outside the upstairs laundry room, I was abruptly transported back to my pew one Sunday morning a few years earlier.
Speaker1	My grandfather was preaching about Hell again, expounding eloquently on what it entailed.
Speaker1	The same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God … and he shall be tormented with fire and brimstone in the presence of the holy angels, and in the presence of the Lamb: And the smoke of their torment ascendeth up for ever and ever: and they have no rest day nor night.
Speaker1	In Hell, my grandfather explained, the damned would each in turn be put on trial: every wrong thought and word and deed that they had ever committed would be adjudicated in exhaustive detail.
Speaker1	And the adjudicators?
Speaker1	The people in Heaven.
Speaker1	Each one of the Saints of God would have a caseload, as it were, personally condemning the reprobates to an eternity of agony and rejoicing at their endless suffering.
Speaker1	It was a very real and present fear that my grandfather elicited with his detailed descriptions of torment—but the idea had been abstract to me until that moment.
Speaker1	As I listened to my grandfather’s words, it suddenly occurred to me to consider Heaven and Hell in practical terms: I would be condemning people to torture?
Speaker1	And I would be happy about it?
Speaker1	I couldn’t even watch a torture scene in a film without jumping out of my seat, overcome with outrage, disgust, and revulsion that anyone could be capable of visiting such horror on a living, breathing human being.
Speaker1	I didn’t think I could condemn people to torture, and sitting in my pew that day, I’d wondered if there was something wrong with me.
Speaker1	No, the thought resounded now.
Speaker1	I picked up a stack of bath towels and handed them to my brother.
Speaker1	If Hell is real, then God is evil.
Speaker1	Terrified, I mentally backtracked.
Speaker1	Maybe.
Speaker1	Walking with Grace and our nieces to the park that weekend, my thoughts veered to a letter to the editor published by the local newspaper when I was sixteen.
Speaker1	It bore my signature, but my aunt Margie had written it.
Speaker1	Though I had agreed with every word, there was one part that rang strongly discordant in my mind: “I’ve watched carefully and listened to my grandfather and those who oppose him.
Speaker1	My grandfather’s Bible-preaching is more agreeable to my heart.” We never appealed to our own thoughts or feelings as reliable evidence of truth, and we routinely disparaged others for doing so.
Speaker1	The Bible was true because it was true, regardless of how I—or anyone else—felt about it or any of its teachings.
Speaker1	This had been a theme of my life, oft-repeated by my mother: The heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked: who can know it?
Speaker1	There was always urgent warning in my mother’s voice when she quoted this passage: we could not trust our hearts.
Speaker1	Our feelings would lead us astray.
Speaker1	Why had Margie written that sentence?
Speaker1	I’d been almost physically repulsed by it, and watching my nieces bound across the field as we arrived at the park, I was finally able to pinpoint why: my sixteen-year-old self had started to recognize the contradiction.
Speaker1	We used our hearts to authenticate the moral truth of the Bible—the same Bible that told us our hearts were deceitful.
Speaker1	I shook my head as I realized that all we had was our hearts.
Speaker1	In writing that sentence, Margie had unwittingly betrayed that at bottom—resting beneath all the chapters and verses that we’d spent years quoting and memorizing—the foundation of it all was a belief that our hearts had led us true when they told us the Bible was the answer.
Speaker1	Our unreliable, desperately wicked, deceitful hearts.
Speaker1	The few weeks following that Fourth of July were the longest I’d ever lived.
Speaker1	Whenever Grace couldn’t avoid being alone with me, our conversations followed a predictable pattern.
Speaker1	I would attempt to dissect the problems at Westboro, and she would nod in agreement at my analysis—but then she would insist on addressing the consequences that I could not bear to consider.
Speaker1	Our family.
Speaker1	How worthless our lives would be without them.
Speaker1	The pathetic emptiness of a life without this divine purpose.
Speaker1	And eternity in Hell.
Speaker1	These were unfathomably horrifying, but I could not let go of the failures of Scripture and logic that I now saw so clearly in the church.
Speaker1	How could we go on living like this?
Speaker1	But how could we live outside of this?
Speaker1	Whether we stayed or left, our prospects were bleak.
Speaker1	There was no containing the despair and devastation that seized my body each time I imagined leaving, so Grace and I resolved not to think about it unless we had the space to mourn without an audience.
Speaker1	She was still avoidant and seemed afraid of me, but we both knew that public displays of unhappiness would raise suspicion in a hurry—accusations of discontentment and murmuring against God—and there was still so much to think through.
Speaker1	When Grace and I were apart, we discussed our doubts by text messages that we deleted shortly after sending.
Speaker1	We agreed that I would keep screenshots of the conversations so that we could examine them later, but that I would transfer them to a hidden folder on my computer in case my parents came to examine my phone.
Speaker1	I had never been subjected to such scrutiny, but others had—and if the request was made, it couldn’t be denied without major trouble.
Speaker1	I hated the deception, but I knew that regardless of what we decided, we needed to be as sure about it as we could be.
Speaker1	For his part, C.G.
Speaker1	was full of gentle, sometimes pointed questions.
Speaker1	He was trying to discern what was happening in my mind, and since my thoughts were swinging back and forth like a pendulum, I was grateful for his calming influence.
Speaker1	Explaining myself helped me to focus.
Speaker1	It gave me something to hold on to.
Speaker1	C.G.
Speaker1	: What do you believe?
Speaker1	MEGAN: I can’t call my whole life a waste.
Speaker1	I’ve learned so very much.
Speaker1	And I never would have met you if I weren’t me.
Speaker1	I really believed those things, and there really is a lot of good in it—about caring and looking out for people.
Speaker1	These are good people.
Speaker1	I wonder if I’ll be able to stand without their support.
Speaker1	I’ve thought before, “Who cares?” re: whether someone is gay.
Speaker1	It was a knee-jerk response, and I’d put the kibosh on it.
Speaker1	I’m not sure what all I believe.
Speaker1	I’m working on it.
Speaker1	C.G.
Speaker1	: This doesn’t seem real.
Speaker1	You must understand that.
Speaker1	MEGAN: Which part?
Speaker1	I know, though.
Speaker1	C.G.
Speaker1	: All of it.
Speaker1	I’m watching True Blood right now, and, as you know, “God Hates Fangs.” That’s you.
Speaker1	That’s crazy.
Speaker1	I know you from YouTube and your voice there is different from the one I hear when I read your words.
Speaker1	It’s all crazy.
Speaker1	You aren’t real to people.
Speaker1	You’re an idea.
Speaker1	And what about Bekah?
Speaker1	She just stays there and lives happily ever after?
Speaker1	Lying in the dark late at night, tucked away with phone in hand, I pondered C.G.’s questions and tried to make sense of them.
Speaker1	I thought about Bekah.
Speaker1	I had always seen myself as much more like her than like Grace—far more willing to yield than to challenge—and I wondered again how I had become so unruly.
Speaker1	The elders weren’t the first major transition in the church, nor were my mother and sister the first close loved ones targeted for church discipline.
Speaker1	In the past, no matter how much I initially doubted a position taken by the church, their justifications always made sense eventually.
Speaker1	Could I even recall the last time Bekah and I were completely in sync in this shared tendency?
Speaker1	Certainly before Twitter, I knew.
Speaker1	MEGAN: Bekah is just like I was not so very long ago.
Speaker1	It will be horrible, and she will take it so hard, and she will blame herself.
Speaker1	She is so tender-hearted.
Speaker1	I love her so.
Speaker1	C.G.
Speaker1	: Why can’t you get her out, too?
Speaker1	I clicked my screen off and squeezed my eyes shut, willing myself not to cry.
Speaker1	Exhausted of tears.
Speaker1	My bedroom suddenly felt stifling, and I opened the window in search of a breeze.
Speaker1	How to explain to him?
Speaker1	I lay back down and stared at the ceiling, now bathed in the orange light of the streetlamp outside.
Speaker1	MEGAN: She wouldn’t come.
Speaker1	She just wouldn’t.
Speaker1	As ardently as I fought you, she would fight any notion that this isn’t the way.
Speaker1	She would be scared of me and for me and would enlist the aid of the whole church to recover me (before I left, I mean).
Speaker1	She is exactly where I was—but she is less confident in herself and therefore even more willing to distrust her own thoughts and judgments.
Speaker1	I wish she would leave—and maybe she will one day.
Speaker1	But I don’t think it will be soon.
Speaker1	Life is short.
Speaker1	And getting shorter all the time.
Speaker1	C.G.
Speaker1	: Then show empathy for people rather than mocking them.
Speaker1	This isn’t my place.
Speaker1	At least not tonight.
Speaker1	Good night, sweet, confused girl.
Speaker1	MEGAN: I’d be offended, except I know: you only know I want to leave, but not all the reasons.
Speaker1	One reason: it does not make me happy to see people killed or starving or maimed.
Speaker1	I don’t want to mock them; I want to help them.
Speaker1	It is your place.
Speaker1	You’re a friend.
Speaker1	Sleep well.
Speaker1	Between Grace, C.G., and the news, I was presented with fresh opportunities to stew in my confusion and despair daily.
Speaker1	Grace was stewing, too, sending me text messages fretting about Hell as she sat at her desk doing data entry work downtown.
Speaker1	As I struggled to answer my sister’s pressing questions about our eternal fate, my thoughts returned to Margie’s letter to the editor—that contradiction of relying on our hearts when our hearts were evil.
Speaker1	It had not occurred to me to see that paradox to its logical conclusion, but now a new question dawned on me:
Speaker1	What if the Bible wasn’t the literal and infallible word of God?
Speaker1	At home in my bedroom, I froze.
Speaker1	This was the sine qua non of our belief system, the foundational truth of the life I had led since I was capable of conscious thought.
Speaker1	I was surprised at how noiselessly it shattered.
Speaker1	Not a single breath passed before my mind pulled forth a Bible story that had rankled me since the first time my mother read it to my siblings and me when I was a little girl.
Speaker1	In the book of Judges, the final three chapters tell the tale of a Levite and his concubine.
Speaker1	We are not told their names—only that she played the whore against him, and retreated to her father’s house in the city of Bethlehem.
Speaker1	There she remained for four months, until her husband went after her, to speak friendly unto her, and to bring her home again.
Speaker1	By the repeated entreaties of his father-in-law, the man was convinced to stay and eat and make merry for several days.
Speaker1	The fifth day arrived, and as they prepared to leave that afternoon, the woman’s father pressed him again: Behold, now the day draweth toward evening, I pray you tarry all night.
Speaker1	But the man would not.
Speaker1	He and his concubine and his servant departed, though it was too late in the day to make it home by nightfall.
Speaker1	That evening, rather than spend the night in a city of strangers, the Levite decided their group would press on to the city of Gibeah, of the tribe of Benjamin.
Speaker1	They arrived just after sunset.
Speaker1	When an old man saw them preparing to sleep in a street of the city, he drew near.
Speaker1	“Let all thy wants lie upon me; only lodge not in the street,” he warned them.
Speaker1	The old man brought them into his house to care for them and their animals.
Speaker1	As they were making their hearts merry, the men of the city surrounded the house, beating at the door and calling out to the old man: they wanted to rape the Levite.
Speaker1	“Bring forth the man that came into thine house, that we may know him.”
Speaker1	The old man begged them not to do such a thing: “Behold, here is my daughter a maiden, and his concubine; them will I bring out now, and humble ye them, and do what seemeth good unto you: but unto this man do not so vile a thing.”
Speaker1	But the men of Gibeah wouldn’t listen to the old man.
Speaker1	The Levite took matters into his own hands, delivering his concubine to the men beating at the door.
Speaker1	And they knew her, and abused her all the night until the morning: and when the day began to spring, they let her go.
Speaker1	As the day dawned, the woman collapsed outside the door of the old man’s house.
Speaker1	Her husband arose and opened the door to leave, only to find her there.
Speaker1	Her hands were on the threshold.
Speaker1	And he said unto her, Up, and let us be going.
Speaker1	But none answered.
Speaker1	The Levite picked up the body of his concubine, carried her back home, and hacked her into twelve pieces.
Speaker1	He sent one to each of the twelve tribes of Israel.
Speaker1	Consider of it, take advice, and speak your minds.
Speaker1	The tribes gathered and sent messengers to Benjamin: turn over those men of Gibeah so that we can put them to death.
Speaker1	The children of Benjamin refused, and civil war ensued—the eleven tribes against the one.
Speaker1	Benjamin dominated the first two skirmishes, annihilating forty thousand men.
Speaker1	The Israelites wept and fasted and made offerings to God.
Speaker1	Should they go to battle a third time?
Speaker1	And the Lord said, Go up; for to morrow I will deliver them into thine hand.
Speaker1	The next day, the children of Israel killed twenty-five thousand men of Benjamin, and their animals, and their women, and set their cities on fire.
Speaker1	Six hundred men fled into the wilderness, and they were all that remained of the tribe of Benjamin.
Speaker1	Having prevailed, the Israelites faced a new problem.
Speaker1	They could not allow an entire tribe to perish, but there were no women left to repopulate Benjamin: all their women had been killed, and all the men of Israel had sworn an oath to God not to marry their daughters to the sons of Benjamin.
Speaker1	Cursed be he that giveth a wife to Benjamin.
Speaker1	Instead they found one city in Israel that had sent no men to battle—and thus, had made no oath.
Speaker1	Twelve thousand valiant men were dispatched to the city to kill every man, woman, and child, except the young women.
Speaker1	They found four hundred young virgins in the city, brought them to the camp, and gave them as wives to the surviving men of Benjamin.
Speaker1	Still, two hundred men remained without wives.
Speaker1	Therefore they commanded the children of Benjamin, saying, Go and lie in wait in the vineyards; And see, and behold, if the daughters of Shiloh come out to dance in dances, then come ye out of the vineyards, and catch you every man his wife.
Speaker1	And thus they did.
Speaker1	This story flashed through my mind in a moment, and I thought—like exhaling a breath I’d been holding my whole life—That is bullshit.
Speaker1	It wasn’t that I didn’t believe it.
Speaker1	It was that every part of the story disgusted me, from God all the way down.
Speaker1	I had forever repressed the outrage and disgust I felt at reading it, and though questioning the Bible like this shook me to my core, I also felt a glimmer of relief.
Speaker1	Of liberation.
Speaker1	I didn’t have to believe that this story was anything but awful—and not just the senseless carnage that left tens of thousands dead.
Speaker1	Every woman in this story had been treated unconscionably: Men snatching unsuspecting women to force them into marriage.
Speaker1	Other women given as gifts, having just witnessed all of their loved ones slain and their city destroyed.
Speaker1	The old man offering his virgin daughter, and the woman sacrificed by her husband to a feral mob, raped to death.
Speaker1	The husband then—finding her fallen with her hands on the threshold of the door—responding with “Up, and let us be going.” I’d wanted to punch him or vomit every time I’d read the words.
Speaker1	Others might place the blame upon the men in the story, but as a predestinarian, I was most repulsed by the God who had instigated and orchestrated the whole thing.
Speaker1	Disgusting.
Speaker1	What if the God presented in this story—in this Bible—was not the real God?
Speaker1	I sat down on my bed, reeling.
Speaker1	How could I suggest this possibility to Grace?
Speaker1	If it frightened me so, there was no question it would scare her, too—especially coming from me.
Speaker1	She might wonder whether I was being influenced by Satan.
Speaker1	It would sound like every argument we’d spent our lives learning to dismiss out of hand.
Speaker1	People who discounted the Bible were angry, just trying to evade the truth of the Scriptures because they were convicted by them.
Speaker1	Of all the questions and doubts I raised, doubting the Bible itself would surely be the most preposterous to my sister.
Speaker1	GRACE: Eternity scares me.
Speaker1	MEGAN: Me, too, sometimes.
Speaker1	I think there must be God because of existence (“science” doesn’t have answers about Creation).
Speaker1	Then I think, what if the God of the Bible isn’t the God of creation?
Speaker1	We don’t believe that the Koran has the truth about God.
Speaker1	Is it just because we were told forever that this is How Things Are?
Speaker1	It’s comforting to think we have all the answers.
Speaker1	Does it really make you happy when you hear about people dying or starving or being maimed?
Speaker1	Do you really want to ask God to hurt people?
Speaker1	I ask myself these questions.
Speaker1	I think the answer is no.
Speaker1	When I’m not scared of the answer, I know the answer is no.
Speaker1	GRACE: What does that last text mean?
Speaker1	MEGAN: It means: I know that saying that (that it doesn’t make me happy when people die) is against what this church believes.
Speaker1	To go against that scares me (sometimes, but not always anymore).
Speaker1	But I know it’s the truth to say that it doesn’t make me happy.
Speaker1	GRACE: I just don’t know anything.
Speaker1	But what if we are wrong and we go to hell?
Speaker1	MEGAN: Why do we think it’s real?
Speaker1	It’s starting to seem made up to scare people into doing what they say.
Speaker1	GRACE: But what if?
Speaker1	MEGAN: Then it would be horrible.
Speaker1	If someone told us we had to obey Artemis or we’d be tormented by Hades when we die, we’d laugh at them.
Speaker1	I think we worry now because we’ve believed it was real forever.