Speaker1	Chapter six.
Speaker1	The Appearance of Evil
Speaker1	Right around the time the world began to unravel, my mother was recovering from surgery.
Speaker1	She was supine in the king-sized bed she shared with my father, one set of pillows stacked beneath her knees and another propping her torso up against the tall, chestnut-colored headboard.
Speaker1	My father was always on the lookout for ways to make her life easier, and he’d found her a small bed-desk from which she was now working.
Speaker1	Aside from the whirring of her laptop, a companionable silence filled the room.
Speaker1	I sat in the chair at her bedside with my feet tucked under me, writing a letter to my sister.
Speaker1	Dear Grace Eliza, Sister-mine, Trouble-maker, Friend—
Speaker1	Photography is where you shine, but you also have a way with words that’s truly your own.
Speaker1	I think this [Field Notes Book] is perfect for you, and I hope you’ll write down the story of the little orphan girl who wanted to be a pirate (changed my life!)
Speaker1	and Adventures of Mini Megan and other important things that strike your keen eye.
Speaker1	I’m so thankful to walk this path with you, dear heart.
Speaker1	So.
Speaker1	Very.
Speaker1	Thankful.
Speaker1	With all my love to my baby sister (and favorite shopping partner ), I am
Speaker1	Yours always,
Speaker1	Megan Marie
Speaker1	I was newly smitten with my anonymous friend, and he had just turned me on to these pocket-sized Field Notes Brand notebooks.
Speaker1	The one in my hand was a special edition allowing for custom headlines, and to its blank cover I had delicately applied dry transfer decals to give it the title THUG LIFE in the chic Futura typeface beloved by hipsters everywhere.
Speaker1	All for the irony, of course.
Speaker1	My eighteen-year-old sister was no more a thug than I was a hipster, but it was fun to knowingly pretend, mocking both ourselves and the identities we took on.
Speaker1	In spite of our skinny jeans and liberal deployment of gangsta rap lyrics in daily conversation, we had the self-awareness to know that we could never convincingly pull off these characters—“The Notorious M.E.G.”—all of which were especially ridiculous and giggle-inducing given that we were members of a despised religious group, both of us still living at home and required to obtain our mother’s permission to leave the house even for short periods.
Speaker1	The juxtaposition was the joke.
Speaker1	“The world is doomed, but check out these shutter shades and old-timey newsie outfits!”
Speaker1	I looked up from the notebook as my mother set aside her computer, her eyelids turned down at the corners.
Speaker1	Exhausted.
Speaker1	Uncomfortable.
Speaker1	Impatient.
Speaker1	We were in the throes of the travel and media frenzy following the Supreme Court arguments, and this compulsory downtime was getting to her.
Speaker1	The surgery had aimed for pain relief in her lower back, and as she curled her body away from me in preparation for a brief afternoon nap, I eased myself into the space beside her and pressed my thumbs firmly into the flesh on either side of her spine.
Speaker1	Ours was a physically expressive family, my parents and the sisters in particular: Bekah, Grace, and I. Massage had long been a casual, regular occurrence in our home—so common, in fact, that I’d developed a Pavlovian response to my sister’s approach: goose bumps would appear all over my skin even before Bekah had begun to smooth away the tension she found in my neck and shoulders.
Speaker1	She and I often spent evening Bible studies standing over our parents as they read aloud, working through the knots that had collected in their muscles as they spent long hours sitting at a desk, or laboring in our overflowing vegetable garden, or picketing on a breezy day with two signs in each hand (“the Butterfly”), or—in our father’s case—commuting 140 miles round-trip each day for his job in Kansas City.
Speaker1	“Thank you, sweet doll,” my mother mumbled into the pillow.
Speaker1	My hands began the familiar trek around each shoulder blade in turn, along the spine, across the span of her low back, and then reversed direction upward, returning to the pliable skin of her neck.
Speaker1	The pressure I applied was alternating at regular intervals, muscle memory taking over, and I continued until her breaths came slow and steady.
Speaker1	A few minutes longer to ensure she wouldn’t rouse, and then I slowly, deliberately disentangled myself.
Speaker1	My mother’s troubles began with an email.
Speaker1	My parents tried to keep it under wraps at first, and they managed to shield my siblings for a short time, but I was twenty-five.
Speaker1	For years I had spent most hours of most days directly in my mother’s orbit.
Speaker1	Though I didn’t know its cause, her distress was apparent to me.
Speaker1	She and my father were spending an inordinate amount of time in heated conversation that became hushed on my approach.
Speaker1	After a day or two of gentle pressing on my part, my parents finally allowed me to see the message—just once, and only on my father’s iPhone for a few short moments.
Speaker1	He hovered, antsy, so I read in haste before he could take it back.
Speaker1	It was a disciplinary email from my eldest brother, Sam—just thirty-two at the time—and Steve, a former documentary filmmaker who’d converted and joined Westboro a decade earlier.
Speaker1	My stomach turned as I read the accusations, which primarily surrounded the harsh, unmerciful way she could treat others in the church.
Speaker1	I knew as well as anyone that my mother could be too zealous in correcting other church members.
Speaker1	I’d frequently found myself on the wrong end of her sharp tongue, and I’d had a front-row seat as most of the others had, as well.
Speaker1	Still, no one could deny that her vehemence was borne of a desire to do right by the Lord and by us, and that—as Margie had rightly noted in her message to me the year before—my mother’s hard edges had been softening for some time now.
Speaker1	She had a remarkable tenderness that had been an example for me all my life, the very embodiment of God loveth a cheerful giver.
Speaker1	She sacrificed for our loved ones tirelessly, the result of an uncanny ability to discern our needs and an unparalleled determination to fill them, no matter what it cost her.
Speaker1	I felt strongly that the case against my mother was overstated, and I was upset that these two men had chosen to stir things up while she was still recovering from surgery.
Speaker1	It was a cowardly assault at a time when she was most vulnerable.
Speaker1	My father seemed to agree.
Speaker1	I could see that he and my mother were gearing up for a fight, preparing her rebuttal—which was also disheartening.
Speaker1	I didn’t want my parents to completely discount what this email was saying, because there was some truth to the criticism.
Speaker1	I wanted my mother to hear the legitimate critique at the heart of this email, but in overplaying their hand, Sam and Steve had offered distraction that allowed for easy dismissal.
Speaker1	Was someone finally going to address this issue that had been a grief of mind to so many of us at various points, only to blow it with narrow-minded and overblown contentions?
Speaker1	It took time for me to recognize this disciplinary message for what it was: the cynical use of a genuine problem—my mother’s abrasiveness—to upend the existing structure of the church.
Speaker1	From the moment he’d joined Westboro, it had been apparent to me that Steve wanted to take over.
Speaker1	He’d stated his desire for leadership plainly, but was thwarted by the biblical requirements of a church leader—that he could not be a novice, lest being lifted up with pride he fall into the condemnation of the devil.
Speaker1	I’d viewed this naked ambition as an awkward fact of church life.
Speaker1	Now that he was not a novice, however, he appeared to be shifting focus to the other obstacle to his rise to power: the longstanding influence of my mother.
Speaker1	For Steve, it seemed to me, her sidelining was a stepping stone.
Speaker1	I’ll never know exactly what occurred in the conversations that followed this email, because a fundamental transformation took hold of the church almost instantly.
Speaker1	Throughout my life, constant, unguarded communication had been all but an object of worship at Westboro.
Speaker1	Dozens of emails and text messages flowed through the church’s distribution lists each day, covering everything from media and lawsuits, to childcare and lawn maintenance.
Speaker1	Members saw one another at protests, hymn-singing gatherings, the family law office, and in our common backyard.
Speaker1	We ate dinner together, read the Bible together, exercised together.
Speaker1	We congregated frequently for “work crews,” where teams of us would put up drywall, paint fences, make signs, mow lawns, and have “cleaning parties” at construction sites to build additions onto members’ houses.
Speaker1	At 6 A.M. on snowy winter mornings, roving bands of young men and women would wander the neighborhood with our shovels to clear sidewalks and driveways so the mothers wouldn’t have to work so hard to get their children to school on time.
Speaker1	And throughout it all, we spoke openly of our struggles and triumphs, the state of our souls, the focus of our recent Bible studies and how these ancient lessons applied to current events and our own lives.
Speaker1	“Communication is the key!” wasn’t just an incidental part of our culture—it was how a group of eighty people managed to maintain such remarkable unity in executing both the endless logistics of communal living and an astonishingly effective worldwide preaching campaign.
Speaker1	Then they that feared the Lord spake often one to another: and the Lord hearkened, and heard it, and a book of remembrance was written before him for them that feared the Lord, and that thought upon his name.
Speaker1	This email marked the end of an era, though I couldn’t know it at the time.
Speaker1	Since I wasn’t privy to the discussions about my mother’s behavior, all I could do was watch with trepidation as events unfolded in front of me.
Speaker1	First there were the apology emails from my parents to the church: “Beloved of God—I have offended people over the years with a hard, undisciplined tongue.
Speaker1	It is so very wrong and shameful.
Speaker1	Please accept my apology and please forgive me.
Speaker1	Self-justification is an amazing thing.
Speaker1	Please pray for me that the Lord would take away the blinders and heal me of this most important of all illnesses.
Speaker1	I love you.
Speaker1	I’m so very sorry for the offense I have caused.” Then there was the response from an aunt: “We will do better to help you both because we love you dearly.” And then came the punishments.
Speaker1	My mother would no longer arrange the pickets in Topeka.
Speaker1	She would not prepare the monthly events calendar.
Speaker1	She would not orchestrate our cross-country protests.
Speaker1	She would not coordinate childcare or media schedules.
Speaker1	For the foreseeable future, my mother would not be allowed to give interviews at all.
Speaker1	My father tried to defend her against the onslaught, to push back against the extreme penalties, but this only resulted in threats of further punishment: if my parents failed to submit to the judgment of the church, anyone over eighteen who was living in their home would move out and live with other church members.
Speaker1	My parents would be shamed and ostracized by their own children.
Speaker1	That final threat was reported to me via a phone call from an aunt who spoke in a reassuring voice.
Speaker1	I stood in the dark in the office I shared with my mother, staring out the window into the spring afternoon as my aunt explained that my parents were “in a very bad way.” That I shouldn’t worry, because the church was not going to let anything bad happen to my siblings and me.
Speaker1	As if our parents were a threat to us.
Speaker1	I was stunned listening to the sudden shift in how the elders spoke, their tender and heartfelt praise for my parents’ boundless dedication and sacrifice abruptly decaying into a noxious contempt.
Speaker1	The rot had set in almost overnight.
Speaker1	I’d kept quiet for days as I tried to understand what was happening, but when my aunt explained that they’d threatened my parents with removing us from our home, my response was visceral.
Speaker1	I felt my lip curl as I nearly erupted in a menacing “Just you fucking try.” The thought shocked me into keeping my silence—had I ever in my life felt such a thing against the Lord’s church?—and a moment later my aunt ended the call.
Speaker1	We may have reached the age of majority, but I couldn’t bring myself to employ the term “adult” in reference to myself or any of the siblings now staring at me expectantly.
Speaker1	I’d called them together as soon as they arrived home, two brothers and two sisters, all between the ages of eighteen and twenty-four: Bekah, Isaiah, Zach, and Grace.
Speaker1	We stood in the back living room, and I closed the door so as not to alert our four youngest brothers, who were doing homework and playing video games in the next rooms.
Speaker1	I looked around before opening our meeting: Isaiah and Zach wore stoic expressions, Bekah’s brow was deeply furrowed, and Grace—the only one already aware of our purpose here—was unsuccessfully attempting to mask her outrage.
Speaker1	I tried to be neutral, but I couldn’t keep the edge out of my voice as I recounted the day’s events.
Speaker1	During the discussions among the elders, it had apparently occurred to someone that my siblings and I might have an opinion about being forced out of our parents’ house.
Speaker1	The home we had shared every day of each of our lives.
Speaker1	I’d received a follow-up call asking that I speak with my siblings so that we could come to a decision—which was yet another bizarre development.
Speaker1	Children were never asked to make independent decisions.
Speaker1	As baptized members of the church, the five of us had a duty to shun those who walk among you disorderly.
Speaker1	The question for us seemed to be: Did the Phelps-Roper children feel we could live with our quarrelsome parents and still serve the Lord as we ought?
Speaker1	I posed the question to my siblings, concluding with a firm “I see no reason to do this, and I have absolutely no interest in leaving.”
Speaker1	“Me, neither,” Grace piped up.
Speaker1	Isaiah and Zach agreed.
Speaker1	Jaw set and brow still furrowed, Bekah looked perturbed but nodded slowly.
Speaker1	The pressure to punish our parents was evident, and we all felt it.
Speaker1	I was proud of my siblings for resisting.
Speaker1	“Okay,” I said.
Speaker1	“I’ll let them know.”
Speaker1	Grace trailed me out the door and up the back steps to my bedroom.
Speaker1	My parents had renovated it for my birthday several years before, replacing the carpet with a serene shade of lilac that complemented the beige drapes.
Speaker1	I loved this space.
Speaker1	At the southwest corner of the second floor, it was far from the common areas where my family spent most of our time, a calm among the chaos.
Speaker1	I’d lie in bed on warm nights with both windows thrown open to the epic storms of my Kansas summers.
Speaker1	Just before a downpour the air would be suffocating, so heavy I could hardly breathe … and then the sky would open and the lightning would flash and the peals of thunder that had spooked me awake as a kid would lull me to sleep.
Speaker1	“What the fuck is going on?”
Speaker1	The “f” word was not really an acceptable use of language in our house, but Grace dearly loved it anyway.
Speaker1	It was a pantomime of mischief and defiance; the accompanying wink was always implied.
Speaker1	Not today, though.
Speaker1	My sister sat down on the bed next to me and held out her hand for my phone.
Speaker1	I gave it over, and she began squirreling through my emails and text messages to question me about what she found there.
Speaker1	Grace was curious and engaged, and since I was so heavily involved in the central work our mother had always done, there was always more detail about church activities in my messages than there was in hers.
Speaker1	She’d been reviewing my phone regularly for a couple of years now, ever since we’d become close—but this would be the last time I gave her free rein.
Speaker1	I had grown possessive of my communication with C.G., and though I cherished having no barriers between my sister and me, I did not want to share him.
Speaker1	This should have been a neon warning sign to me, but the roiling turmoil in the church was a distraction from my growing feelings for him and enabled my denial.
Speaker1	Grace and I were in a state of disbelief at what was happening to our parents, convinced that it was undeserved and unduly harsh—but there was something else, too.
Speaker1	It picked at me the longer we spoke, my apprehension mounting until I finally identified its source:
Speaker1	“Wait a second.
Speaker1	Who exactly is making these decisions about Mom and Dad?”
Speaker1	My grandfather had long preached that Westboro was the quintessential New Testament church: “local, visible, autonomous, self-governing, exercising discipline over her members.” The verses addressing church decision-making were myriad, and they made it clear that consensus was required.
Speaker1	When church matters came up—especially disciplinary matters—active participation was the duty of every member.
Speaker1	Everyone had to vote.
Speaker1	Everyone had to agree.
Speaker1	Without exception.
Speaker1	If even a single member disagreed, no action would be taken.
Speaker1	This had been the standard all my life.
Speaker1	Fulfil ye my joy, that ye be likeminded, having the same love, being of one accord, of one mind.
Speaker1	The need for church unity was one of our animating principles, the reason we were in constant communion and communication with one another.
Speaker1	It’s why we often answered questions from journalists and passersby using the same words in the same order with the same tone.
Speaker1	To some, this phenomenon was evidence of indoctrination and coercion, but I never saw it that way.
Speaker1	We were of one mind as the Lord required us to be, and these verses showed that each of us had a voice that was integral to the church’s success.
Speaker1	So why were the meetings about my parents taking place behind closed doors?
Speaker1	Grace shook her head, looking as disconcerted as I felt.
Speaker1	In spite of our refusal to leave our home, the threat had its desired effect on our mom and dad: the willingness to distance my siblings and me from our parents sent a clear signal that their exclusion from the church was an imminent possibility.
Speaker1	Faced with the apparent fact that the congregation was in full agreement as to the enormity of my parents’ sin and the righteousness of their punishment, my mother and father could reach only one conclusion: that God had blinded and deluded them as to their grievous faults.
Speaker1	That their judgment was impaired, their thoughts fatally compromised, and that the only way forward was to trust and submit to the collective wisdom of the church without question.
Speaker1	My parents seemed lost and dejected that night when they pitifully thanked my siblings and me for choosing not to leave them.
Speaker1	My heart ached for them.
Speaker1	They seemed broken—and that was exactly the point.
Speaker1	The fight had gone out of them.
Speaker1	Inexplicably, it had not gone out of me.
Speaker1	On an evening walk with my sister-in-law Jennifer, I raged.
Speaker1	Working myself into a frenzy, I argued that no part of this process was being done in a Scriptural fashion.
Speaker1	Jen kept saying, “You need to talk to the elders.”
Speaker1	“I have!
Speaker1	I’ve talked with Margie and Lizz and—”
Speaker1	“No,” she insisted, “the elders.”
Speaker1	I paused, confused.
Speaker1	Jen held forth for a few minutes, and it soon became clear that she was not referring to “the elders” as the term had always been used at Westboro: an informal descriptor of all of the older people in the church, men and women of wisdom and experience.
Speaker1	Instead she was referring to “the elders” as if they were the holders of a formal position in the church.
Speaker1	What…?
Speaker1	I thought, surprised and shocked into silence yet again.
Speaker1	At the next break in Jen’s diatribe on submission, I asked, “And who are the elders?”
Speaker1	Fred Jr. Jon.
Speaker1	Tim.
Speaker1	Charles.
Speaker1	Ben.
Speaker1	Sam.
Speaker1	Steve.