Speaker1	To lie in the dark and talk with Gran—wise and soft-spoken, keeper of stories and resolver of spats—was a privilege.
Speaker1	That night it was a quiet, considered admonition she had for me.
Speaker1	“You’re such a good girl, Meg,” she half whispered across the room.
Speaker1	“You’re a good friend.
Speaker1	You’re such a blessing to your parents.
Speaker1	You help your mom so much.” She was silent for a moment.
Speaker1	“Please promise me you won’t ever change.
Speaker1	A lot of people, when they get to be your age, start to change.
Speaker1	They start getting into a lot of trouble.” I thought of Jael and felt myself beginning to panic.
Speaker1	She was warning me, I realized, because I was on the cusp of dangerous territory.
Speaker1	I felt the force and weight of her charge, assuring her over and over again that I would not change.
Speaker1	That I would not be a burden to my parents.
Speaker1	That I would watch out for myself and my loved ones.
Speaker1	That I would be good.
Speaker1	Despite my fears, I settled into the rhythms of sixth grade without so very much trouble.
Speaker1	Middle school made me feel official and grown up, but the very best part was getting to spend time with my older cousins.
Speaker1	I cherished our newfound closeness, and so was completely thrown when, months into the school year, a mutual friend accidentally made reference to “Jael’s boyfriend” in my presence.
Speaker1	How could I have missed this?
Speaker1	The girl immediately tried to backtrack—it was widely known among our classmates that the Phelpses weren’t allowed to date—but it was too late.
Speaker1	I was sick with worry and fear, but also pleased to have discovered valuable information that could help save my cousin from the clutches of this vicious sin.
Speaker1	I colluded with other church members to surreptitiously question classmates about the dalliance, and then reported back to my mother that afternoon after school.
Speaker1	I don’t recall the consequences of this incident except as they related to me.
Speaker1	There was joy at being the object of my mother’s pride; instead of following my cousin’s bad example or trying to hide her wrongdoing, I’d been responsible and cautious and was looking out for the soul of my friend.
Speaker1	There was hope against hope that sweet Jael would be saved from her concupiscence.
Speaker1	And there was determination to never allow myself to be in her position, to never repeat the mistakes of the dearly beloved women in our family.
Speaker1	I never felt superior to them, no—on the contrary, the moral missteps of such strong, godly women made me fear all the more for the safety of my own soul.
Speaker1	I was female, and therefore easily deceived, and I prayed that God would deliver me from such sinful thoughts and desires.
Speaker1	My mom, my aunts, and my Gran warned me in mostly vague terms about the sensual sins that had befallen the most devout of women.
Speaker1	And as with Gran, I heard such expectation and hope in their voices as they spoke to me: that I wouldn’t fall to the obstacles that had caused so many before me to stumble; that the standard was higher for me and my generation.
Speaker1	With the Lord’s help, I would make absolutely certain that my own thoughts and behavior were above reproach.
Speaker1	As it turned out, I didn’t have much to worry about.
Speaker1	From middle school through college, there was really no one in the church whom I could conceivably marry—it was still almost entirely my relatives—so I didn’t entertain any serious thoughts of relationships.
Speaker1	I had hormones as a teenager, of course, and a couple of boys at school caught my eye—but in addition to being terrified of lust and of falling out of favor with God, I was a realist.
Speaker1	We protested every single day in our hometown and across the country, and our church was universally hated for it.
Speaker1	I understood that the likelihood of any of my classmates being interested in me was essentially nil—especially after we started protesting outside our high school during lunch period—and I also knew that the odds of any of them joining the church were even lower.
Speaker1	I knew a hopeless situation when I saw one.
Speaker1	I also knew that I was far too young to be thinking about boys anyway, so the whole idea was mostly off my radar.
Speaker1	I got older.
Speaker1	A crew from the BBC came to Topeka to film their documentary about Westboro in 2006, the year I turned twenty.
Speaker1	Louis Theroux, the wily but affable presenter, spent a great deal of time talking to me and the other young adult women in my family.
Speaker1	He and the rest of the crew seemed fascinated by the fact that our church was populated almost entirely by the children and grandchildren of the only pastor it had ever had—an especially salient consideration given the dearth of potential spouses for us, the grandchildren.
Speaker1	We would likely never marry or have children of our own, which Louis saw as a huge problem for us, both personally and as a church.
Speaker1	To him, the desire for companionship was in the essential nature of humanity, and without it we young, vivacious women would grow to be bitter spinsters, old and alone.
Speaker1	He pointed out that our doctrines and strict policy of marriage only to church members were against our interests as a church body, too; they effectively cut off new blood that the church would need to grow.
Speaker1	We would all eventually die off without it, and then Westboro would be no more.
Speaker1	We dismissed Louis’s arguments as utter poppycock.
Speaker1	First of all, we told him, only the basest of humanity is ruled by carnal lust.
Speaker1	There is no true member of God’s church who is so lascivious as to need marriage, and certainly not one who would be willing to defy God and marry an unbeliever.
Speaker1	Be ye not unequally yoked together with unbelievers: for what fellowship hath righteousness with unrighteousness?
Speaker1	and what communion hath light with darkness?
Speaker1	or what part hath he that believeth with an infidel?
Speaker1	Wherefore come out from among them, and be ye separate, saith the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing.
Speaker1	The Apostle Paul’s second letter to the Corinthians is infinitely clear: no matter the circumstances, a desire to marry outside the church is dispositive evidence of one’s lack of salvation.
Speaker1	Second, we argued that God is entirely sovereign and controls the minds of all humankind.
Speaker1	Of course, He’d chosen to harden the hearts of the vast majority of them—that’s why our church was so small—but with God, all things are possible.
Speaker1	If He so chose, he could easily bring any or all of us a husband or wife.
Speaker1	They would become believers and join the church, and then they would be suitable spouses for a servant of the Lord.
Speaker1	Finally and most important, we were living in the last of the Last Days, and Jesus would soon return through the clouds and save His people and dismantle the foundations of the earth.
Speaker1	Who cares about marriage when the world will imminently be destroyed by God?
Speaker1	But when Louis approached Jael with questions of marriage and the future, she didn’t respond with a Bible verse—just a gentle laugh at his ignorance and a rhetorical question or two of her own: “Are you kidding?
Speaker1	Who is gonna marry us?
Speaker1	!”
Speaker1	After so many years, Jael had become a realist, too.
Speaker1	At twenty-four, I had a major stumble.
Speaker1	It was a short-lived infatuation with a young, foreign salesman who approached my seventeen-year-old sister, Grace, and me while we were walking through the mall (in a hurry, as always, because we couldn’t be out by ourselves for too long).
Speaker1	He convinced us to let him do a demonstration on Grace’s hair of the curling iron he was selling, and we phoned home to get permission.
Speaker1	The only reason we could even hope for a green light was that the salesman was Israeli.
Speaker1	At that time, our church was exploring the book of Revelation, and many church members believed that we would be the instruments used by God to save 144,000 Jews.
Speaker1	The whole doctrine was incredibly strange to me—it certainly wasn’t theology that I’d grown up with—but I wanted to understand it.
Speaker1	I’d also never met an Israeli Jew, and he seemed different from the American Jews I’d met at pickets (which may have had something to do with the fact that I wasn’t holding a GOD HATES JEWS sign and singing an anti-Semitic parody of “Hatikvah,” but I digress).
Speaker1	My mom was curious, too; it seemed like both of us were thinking something along the lines of “Maybe we’ll meet a saved Jew right here in Topeka!” So Grace and I got the go-ahead.
Speaker1	Mom even told me to invite him and his colleague, also Israeli, to church on Sunday.
Speaker1	We sat there talking for about an hour while he worked through my sister’s impossibly long locks—a woman’s uncut hair being a sign of her obedience and subjection to God and to her father or husband.
Speaker1	Looking back, there isn’t anything about this guy that I can point to as having been especially appealing.
Speaker1	I could tell that he was interested in me, but more to the point, there was a slim chance that he could be saved—a hope I hadn’t dared to have for any guy outside the church in all my years.
Speaker1	More than anything, the feeling I had sitting in that chair was simple possibility, and it was electrifying—like nothing I’d ever felt before.
Speaker1	The Israelis couldn’t make it to church two days later because of work, but they did come to Sunday dinner at my house.
Speaker1	When they walked in with homemade falafel, the sweet, spicy scent of barbecue already permeated the kitchen.
Speaker1	After dinner, we sat around the living room all evening—the salesmen and my parents and siblings—talking about God and Judaism and Israel and the Bible.
Speaker1	Hebrew was their first language, which made Google Translate a necessity and deep discussion well-nigh impossible.
Speaker1	Neither side walked away convinced by the other’s beliefs, but it was a noteworthy conversation—less because of its substance and more because of its tone.
Speaker1	It was contemplative rather than contentious, which wasn’t generally the norm when it came to Westboro members and theological debates.
Speaker1	A few weeks later, I was out for a solo bike ride around the campus of my alma mater, when suddenly the Israeli pulled up next to me in an old car and said I should come see him.
Speaker1	I told him I couldn’t, but he pointed toward a nearby apartment building and said I’d only be there for just a minute.
Speaker1	The tiny spark of excitement that shot through me was more than dwarfed by an overwhelming sense of foreboding and dread; I felt physically ill.
Speaker1	I pedaled on for a moment, then turned around and headed toward his building.
Speaker1	I tried to maintain some sense of propriety by resolving that I wouldn’t go into his apartment.
Speaker1	This was already the appearance of evil, but I felt that going inside would be unforgivable, my chastity essentially assumed to be forfeit.
Speaker1	It was early evening, but the sun was still hot, the extreme humidity of our Kansas summer still stifling.
Speaker1	I found him sitting in the shade of the apartment building when I pulled into the parking lot.
Speaker1	It was late July by then, and I was halfway through a fourteen-mile ride; beads of sweat were forming and falling all over my skin, deeply tanned that far into the season.
Speaker1	I got off my bike and sat down on the curb next to him.
Speaker1	We talked for a minute.
Speaker1	I showed him photos of the results of my own amateur attempts with the curling iron.
Speaker1	He laughed and then stood up and said we should go inside where it was cool.
Speaker1	I demurred, my heart pounding steadily in my ears.
Speaker1	It felt like the world was moving in slow motion.
Speaker1	Just then, the other salesman darted outside and teasingly grabbed my little black backpack, absconding with it back into the apartment.
Speaker1	It was a flirtatious move, but I protested angrily—my phone and wallet were in there, and I couldn’t leave without it.
Speaker1	I followed them into the apartment, the corrosive acid in my stomach seeming to multiply with each step until I thought I would vomit.
Speaker1	The blast of air conditioning that hit me when I walked in was welcome, immediately bringing goose bumps to my skin, but it was almost completely dark inside.
Speaker1	The lights were off and the curtains drawn, so it took my eyes a minute to adjust from the brightness outside.
Speaker1	His roommate had thrown my bag into his bedroom, so I followed him there.
Speaker1	He sat on the bed.
Speaker1	I pleaded with him to just give me the bag, but he insisted I sit down next to him, facing him.
Speaker1	I sat.
Speaker1	He said sweet things I wanted to believe—that I was beautiful, that he cared about me—and then tried to kiss me.
Speaker1	I evaded awkwardly, tucking into myself and bringing my arms up as if to protect my face.
Speaker1	No.
Speaker1	I could not cross this line.
Speaker1	He tried again, and again I evaded.
Speaker1	I stood up.
Speaker1	He gave me my bag.
Speaker1	I let him hug me.
Speaker1	We walked outside.
Speaker1	He hugged me again.
Speaker1	And then I was off.
Speaker1	I biked straight home feeling sick and shaky and tortured with guilt.
Speaker1	I cried as I rode, overcome with shame and panic that God would curse me for what I’d done.
Speaker1	I had let my whole family down.
Speaker1	My parents.
Speaker1	The church.
Speaker1	Myself.
Speaker1	I was no longer unsullied.
Speaker1	It wasn’t just my actions that were so exceedingly sinful; it was the indefensible thoughts that had led me to them.
Speaker1	But I say unto you, That whosoever looketh on a woman to lust after her hath committed adultery with her already in his heart.
Speaker1	According to Jesus, the fact that I’d had those feelings in the first place made me guilty of adultery.
Speaker1	I felt broken, but I tried to clean myself up as best I could, to pretend like nothing had happened.
Speaker1	When he emailed a few days later—“You don’t understand how I think about you all day long.”—I couldn’t stand it anymore.
Speaker1	I showed the message to my mom and begged for help and forgiveness.
Speaker1	She was understanding and kind, but I thought I saw doubt in her eyes when I explained that I’d only hugged him twice, that I hadn’t done anything else (why would I feel so guilty and afraid if that was all we’d done?
Speaker1	), and that pained me all the more.
Speaker1	She sat down beside me and read me a passage from the book of Isaiah: Neither let the eunuch say, Behold, I am a dry tree.
Speaker1	For thus saith the LORD unto the eunuchs that keep my sabbaths, and choose the things that please me, and take hold of my covenant; Even unto them will I give in mine house and within my walls a place and a name better than of sons and of daughters: I will give them an everlasting name, that shall not be cut off.
Speaker1	My mama wasn’t excusing my behavior, but she was trying to tell me that she understood, trying to help me find comfort in the very likely scenario that I would be a “eunuch” for the rest of my life, trying to help me see that having a place in the house of God—His church—was better than having a husband or sons or daughters.
Speaker1	She was preparing me to accept that this was a sacrifice I might be required to make for the kingdom of God’s sake, as several of my aunts had been called to do.
Speaker1	I squeezed her hand and cried quietly, something I found myself doing each time I encountered that verse thereafter, without ever quite knowing why—just a nebulous, fleeting sense of loss that I neglected to pursue.
Speaker1	It was even worse when my oldest brother, Sam, called to talk to me.
Speaker1	He’s seven years older than me, and I’d always admired and looked up to him as a near-perfect example of a true servant of God.
Speaker1	He kindly chided me, and told me that I couldn’t pursue this.
Speaker1	That by wanting something that God hadn’t given me, I was murmuring against Him.
Speaker1	That the people in the Bible who’d murmured against God had been destroyed.
Speaker1	That I needed to get back to single-hearted fidelity to God and put away this sin.
Speaker1	Whether or not I ever got married was God’s decision alone, Sam reminded me.
Speaker1	If He chose not to give me a husband, then I should be thankful, because then it would be my happy lot to serve Him without being encumbered by the cares of this life.
Speaker1	He reminded me of the Apostle’s words: The unmarried woman careth for the things of the Lord, that she may be holy both in body and in spirit: but she that is married careth for the things of the world, how she may please her husband.
Speaker1	We don’t get to be mad at God for not giving us what we want, Sam said.
Speaker1	How dare we?
Speaker1	God is Perfect, Sovereign, and Just—and we are His to do with as He pleases.
Speaker1	Of course it was true, all of it.
Speaker1	I knew all the words by heart.
Speaker1	Sam was right, and I was so grateful to my big brother for bringing them to my remembrance, for helping guide me back to sanity and away from sin.
Speaker1	We got past it.
Speaker1	I didn’t bike by myself anymore.
Speaker1	Of my own accord, I installed a tracking app on my phone so that I could show my mom where I’d gone if I ever had to leave the house unaccompanied.
Speaker1	I wanted to be on the strait and narrow path Jesus spoke of, the one to salvation and eternal life.
Speaker1	I wanted to prove—to myself and to my family—that I wasn’t going to continue down a path that would lead me to Hell and destruction.
Speaker1	I would pray, and the Lord would help me.
Speaker1	I would be vigilant.
Speaker1	I would stay close to home.
Speaker1	I would avoid going anywhere alone.
Speaker1	I would keep my distance from anyone who could trip me up.
Speaker1	I would be safe.
Speaker1	My phone vibrated briefly and played the already-familiar trill of the Words With Friends tone.
Speaker1	I glanced at the screen and read the notification, though I knew what it said:
Speaker1	“Your move!”
Speaker1	It’s vaguely suggestive, which I noted and then pretended I hadn’t—as I had every day for the past week we’d been playing.
Speaker1	It happened the same way each day: there was no play during the daylight hours, and then at some point in the evening, he’d make a move in the game and we’d start to chat.
Speaker1	He’d question me about theology, ask me to explain more about the pickets and verses I’d posted on Twitter that day, and make vague references to his life as a “country lawyer.” I’d answer his questions, describe Westboro’s history and doctrines, and tell him about walking out of the Kansas City premiere of Kevin Smith’s film Red State.
Speaker1	(Smith had taken to Twitter to invite me to review the Westboro-inspired film onstage after the showing, and my parents had agreed to allow it.
Speaker1	But when we caught sight of two former church members—including my brother Josh, whom I hadn’t seen in seven years—my mom sensed a setup and the whole group of us bailed.)
Speaker1	We made our moves so quickly that we’d get through an entire game each night, and then begin again with a new game the next evening.
Speaker1	In all our conversations, I was careful to maintain propriety; I still knew absolutely nothing for certain about this man—including whether he even was a man.
Speaker1	I was hyper-aware that he could be a journalist or otherwise trying to entrap me, to trick me into revealing some titillating piece of information about “The Most Hated Family in America.” I wasn’t terribly worried about this possibility, though; I wrote everything with the assumption that it could be published in a newspaper—exactly as I would respond on Twitter, but without the 140-character limit.
Speaker1	“If you ever have a question about whether it’s appropriate to say something,” my mother always said, “just add the word judge to the end of it—as if you were addressing a judge in the middle of a courtroom.” I took my mom’s advice to heart, but I was still amazed at how quickly I had fallen into this pattern with my anonymous friend—and in complete denial about how much I was coming to crave my interactions with him.
Speaker1	There was also something illusory about talking with a person who was faceless and (presumably) far away.
Speaker1	Before Twitter, friendship with outsiders had always been easy to avoid; I’d chat with classmates during school, but since there was no interaction outside of that, the relationships always fizzled.
Speaker1	All I’d ever had to do was keep a little distance from them, and outsiders would always be at arm’s length, never close enough to hurt me.
Speaker1	And when physical separation failed, like at the salesman’s apartment that summer day, I was still mostly protected; as a child, I had donned guilt, shame, and fear—of God, of Hell, of the church—and I wore them like an impenetrable cloak that could never be shed.
Speaker1	But this was not like that.
Speaker1	It felt different.
Speaker1	Is it even real when half of the conversation comes from a person completely shrouded in shadow?
Speaker1	Is it real when the words themselves and all evidence of their existence disappear forever after just a few hours?
Speaker1	Lying prone on my bed in my pajamas, perched on my elbows with phone in hand, it was easy to believe that it was not—that the vast distance between us made me safe.
Speaker1	Distance, as I would come to learn, is a relative concept in matters of the heart.
Speaker1	“You’re too much.”
Speaker1	It became a frequent refrain of his, and one that I adored (vastly superior to the other expression he was so fond of: “You’re okay.”).
Speaker1	After playing and chatting for a few weeks, I understood this saying to mean that my attention to detail and ridiculous enthusiasm at the most insignificant of occurrences were a joy to him—or, as he’d put it himself a few times, “I love the way your mind works.” This was a shock, and touched me in ways I could not have anticipated.
Speaker1	I’d been getting in trouble all my life for talking too much and too fast, rambling on and on about subjects and ideas that almost no one else cared about—but this anonymous stranger wanted to hear them.
Speaker1	Which is how I ended up telling him silly stories like:
Speaker1	“This morning I was trying to think of an economic principle to describe a situation.
Speaker1	I learned it in Microecon, but couldn’t remember the name of the principle.
Speaker1	Eventually, I did.
Speaker1	I just got to my bed and found an exam from Microecon.
Speaker1	The one with the answer I was looking for (principle of diminishing marginal utility).
Speaker1	Haven’t seen this in 5 years, and have no idea how it got here.
Speaker1	No one even knew I was looking for the answer.
Speaker1	Weird stuff!”
Speaker1	As much as I enjoyed sharing my stories with him, I wanted to hear his stories, too—but it seemed hopeless.
Speaker1	I was already consumed with curiosity, and his refusals to open up just made me all the more determined.
Speaker1	Since he always balked when I asked questions—especially ones that might reveal more of his identity—I stopped asking (or at least reduced my questions by half; I was truly desperate, though I couldn’t allow myself to admit it).
Speaker1	It was clear that my fear that he was an insidious deceiver had a twin: his fear that our friendship—the deepest friendship I’d ever had outside of Westboro—would reflect poorly on him if it became known in his small community.
Speaker1	I realized I just had to be patient and not too probing, to let him share what he wanted when he wanted.
Speaker1	“Do you play an instrument?” I asked him one day.
Speaker1	“No, but I have DirecTV.”
Speaker1	I found him ridiculously clever.
Speaker1	As the weeks and then months passed, my patience paid off.
Speaker1	In addition to the information I’d already gleaned, I discovered that he was from a very small town (though not in Nebraska, I was relieved to learn; I still harbored many hard feelings for the state after police officers in Bellevue arrested my mother for lawfully protesting).
Speaker1	I knew he was somewhat older than my twenty-five years—early thirties, I guessed.
Speaker1	His family had always had a farm, but his parents were professionals: a social worker and a nursing professor.
Speaker1	His only sibling, a brother, lived in Chicago with his wife and three children.
Speaker1	His family was of Norwegian descent, and he was very tall, with blond hair and blue eyes.
Speaker1	I even got part of his name: his initials, C.G.
Speaker1	His fear of being connected to WBC made even more sense when I discovered that he was an elected official.
Speaker1	I didn’t like his reticence, but I could see where he was coming from.
Speaker1	Most of our discussions revolved around Westboro and theology, which he wasn’t terribly familiar with.
Speaker1	I tried to educate him, but no matter how tenaciously I defended our positions, he just couldn’t get past some of them—especially the funeral protests.
Speaker1	“But what about the family?” he would press me.
Speaker1	My answer to this question sounded more and more hollow as time went by, but I refused to admit how uneasy—almost guilty—this line of questioning was making me feel.
Speaker1	I argued the position I’d believed since I was a kid: that the definition of love was “truth,” and that any expression of truth was, by definition, loving.
Speaker1	Truth was love regardless of context, target, or tone—even when it involved holding a sign that read THANK GOD FOR DEAD SOLDIERS on the sidewalk near a military funeral, while singing praises to the homemade bombs that killed them.
Speaker1	C.G.
Speaker1	strongly disagreed, and it became a point of contention that came up more often than the rest of his objections.