Speaker1	Chapter one.
Speaker1	The Quarrel of the Covenant
Speaker1	If a mother thinks something is important enough to take a public position about, shouldn’t she teach her children that value?
Speaker1	Where else should children be at the time of public debate?
Speaker1	At the local video arcade?
Speaker1	I don’t think we should pretend that these vital issues don’t affect children.
Speaker1	—Shirley Phelps-Roper, letter to the editor, Topeka Capital Journal, August 26, 1991
Speaker1	I didn’t understand what was going on, not at first.
Speaker1	The signs simply appeared one day and never left, like some undeniable force of nature.
Speaker1	I’d guess Topekans experienced their arrival that way, as well.
Speaker1	My mother’s family had been a well-known and polarizing presence in the city for decades—but in my memory, the picketing is the beginning, and it started at Gage Park.
Speaker1	It sure didn’t look like a park to me.
Speaker1	There were no swings or slides or jungle gyms—just an open field that separated the place where we parked from the busy intersection of 10th Street and Gage Boulevard.
Speaker1	As pastor of the tiny Westboro Baptist Church, my grandfather would drive the big red pickup filled with signs he’d made, and the rest of the church—consisting almost entirely of my aunts, uncles, cousins, parents, grandparents, and siblings—would follow in a caravan of vehicles.
Speaker1	I couldn’t read the messages Gramps had carefully written since I was still a few months shy of kindergarten, but when I saw photos as a teenager, I was surprised by how small and restrained some were compared to what came later: WATCH YOUR KIDS!
Speaker1	GAYS IN RESTRMS.
Speaker1	The adults would pick up as many signs as they could carry, walk them across the field, and lean them against the trunks of the two biggest trees.
Speaker1	The rest of us just had to walk by and grab one.
Speaker1	During those first few months—June, July, August of 1991—our habit was to hold our signs and walk in a big circle just next to the roadway, cars whizzing by in all four lanes of traffic.
Speaker1	The baseball hats my dad made us wear always gave me headaches, but I was glad to have them once I was out there walking in the heavy afternoon heat.
Speaker1	As I got older, I came to learn the story of Gage Park and the events that prompted our first protests.
Speaker1	In the summer of 1989, two years before we started picketing, Gramps had been biking through the park with my brother Josh, who wasn’t quite five years old at the time.
Speaker1	My grandfather’s custom was to ride ahead a bit, and then circle back—ride ahead, and circle back.
Speaker1	One of the times he did so, he thought he saw two men approaching my brother, apparently attempting to lure him into the wooded area shrouded by bushes at the southwest corner of the park.
Speaker1	Alarmed and livid, Gramps got to work.
Speaker1	He spoke with one park official who told him, “At any hour of the day or night, male couples may be seen entering and exiting the area.” The official also mentioned that he regularly passed along citizen complaints to his superiors—but to no avail.
Speaker1	My grandfather soon discovered that sex in the park was a well-documented issue in the local media; sting operations conducted by the Topeka Police Department had resulted in a string of high-profile arrests over the years.
Speaker1	A nationally circulated gay and lesbian travel guide listed the park as a “cruisy area”—a place where men could cruise for anonymous sex.
Speaker1	Even now, Gage Park is listed in that guide, though a warning was added shortly after Westboro’s picketing began: AYOR.
Speaker1	At your own risk.
Speaker1	Armed with this information, my grandfather took action.
Speaker1	He began by detailing his findings in a letter to the mayor, opening with a colorful description of the problem (“A malodorous sore with the scab off is open and running at the extreme southwest corner of Gage Park”) and concluding with a question: “Do you think Gage Park’s running sore could be permanently fixed?
Speaker1	Your consideration is appreciated.” The mayor’s response acknowledged that the city of Topeka was “well aware of the situation” at the park, and that they were “in the process of putting together a program to bring the situation to a halt.” Nearly two years passed, during which time my grandfather monitored the situation, with no apparent improvement.
Speaker1	He continued to write letters to city officials and to appear regularly at city council meetings, insisting that they clean up the park.
Speaker1	According to church lore, my grandfather accused city officials of “sitting around like last year’s Christmas trees” during one such meeting—at which point the mayor instructed the police to escort my grandfather out of the council chambers.
Speaker1	Convinced that the city would persist in its idleness, Gramps decided that we would take to the streets and demand that it take action.
Speaker1	In hindsight, our protests were bound to elicit an intensely negative reaction—especially because our message went far beyond calls for the cleanup of Gage Park.
Speaker1	Gramps was an “Old School Baptist,” he said, and was determined to represent the Scriptural position on homosexuality.
Speaker1	He leapt immediately into attacks on the gay community as a whole, blaming them for the AIDS epidemic and proclaiming that they deserved the death penalty.
Speaker1	The Topeka Capital Journal published many Westboro letters, including one signed by one of my aunts comparing the United States to Sodom and Gomorrah, cities destroyed by God “[b]ecause of their sin regarding homosexuality.” She declared AIDS to be “a disease for which the homosexual must take the sole blame” and insisted that the blood of straight AIDS victims “should be avenged upon those guilty of introducing and gleefully spreading this deadly disease: the homosexual.” Even during an era in which disapproval of LGBT people was more common and socially acceptable, it took only four short sentences for my aunt to make claims scandalous enough to outrage most readers—and our signs managed to do the same with even greater economy.
Speaker1	MILITANT GAYS SPREAD AIDS.
Speaker1	EXPOSE GAY-AIDS PLOY.
Speaker1	GAYS ARE WORTHY OF DEATH (ROM.
Speaker1	1:32) = AIDS.
Speaker1	And soon enough, what would become our most infamous message: GOD HATES FAGS.
Speaker1	The community response to our protests would mystify me for years, thanks to an ignorance borne both of youth and of the religious education I was receiving at home.
Speaker1	I was five years old when the picketing began, and I didn’t understand why anyone would reject our message, let alone why our protests would draw counterprotesters—“counters.” They came every week in the beginning, and I was scared of them at first.
Speaker1	“Young punks” and “diseased, probably got AIDS,” Gramps would say.
Speaker1	The Bible forbade girls to cut our hair, but some of their women came out with cropped manes colored bright reds and blues and purples—“Kool-Aid hair”—and with metal in their faces.
Speaker1	There were boys with mullets, others with half their heads shaved and the other half covered by long black hair that hung in greasy strands across ugly faces.
Speaker1	Some looked like my dad, tall and skinny in tank tops and the awfully short running shorts in style at the time, and some were fat and bearded, combat boots on their feet and flannel shirts tied around their waists.
Speaker1	They’d come out in angry mobs—fifty, a hundred, more and less—and try to surround our group of about thirty, starting fistfights with the Westboro dads who made a human barrier between us and them.
Speaker1	Sometimes there were cops and sometimes there were handcuffs and sometimes we were in them—which wasn’t fair, I thought, because we were just trying to protect ourselves from those “ruffians.” I held my breath whenever I walked by them, so I wouldn’t catch whatever it was that was making them such awful people.
Speaker1	The counters would urge drivers to honk and yell and flip us off, which they did en masse.
Speaker1	“Hatemongers!” “Nazis!” “Go home!” “Get a job!” “What the fuck is wrong with you?” “I’m gonna kick the shit outta you!” They threw eggs and beer and big plastic Pepsi bottles filled with urine as they sped off down the road.
Speaker1	Drivers and passengers would sometimes abandon their vehicles in the middle of the street, car doors hanging wide open, and cross lanes of traffic to come after us on foot.
Speaker1	My cousins and I would scuttle away, back behind Mom or an aunt who stepped between us and them.
Speaker1	From behind my sign, I watched them approach us to hit and threaten and shove and bellow and spit and grab for our signs, our bodies, our hair.
Speaker1	The police rarely seemed to help, but my parents kept us safe.
Speaker1	Still, I was alarmed and angry.
Speaker1	How dare they, I raged.
Speaker1	That’s my mom!
Speaker1	What made them think they could do this to us?
Speaker1	Why weren’t the cops stopping them?
Speaker1	But my grandfather had a different perspective on the opposition and scorn we faced: it was proof that God was with us.
Speaker1	He would quote Jesus, who warned his disciples to expect the hatred of the world: If the world hate you, ye know that it hated me before it hated you.
Speaker1	If ye were of the world, the world would love his own: but because ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hateth you.
Speaker1	“In fact,” Gramps would roar during his Sunday sermons, “I’d be supremely afraid if the people of this evil city were on our side!” Woe unto you, when all men shall speak well of you!
Speaker1	for so did their fathers to the false prophets.
Speaker1	Musical combat became an important front in the battle for Gage Park, and this was one that I relished: I was too small to physically defend the church against our opponents, but by God I was gonna make myself heard.
Speaker1	While they were chanting things like Two, four, six, eight, Phelps is always spreading hate, we would sing hymns or this new song Gramps had written, upbeat and so catchy.
Speaker1	It was a parody of Gene Autry’s “Back in the Saddle Again,” and because the first and final lines had the same melody, we could sing it in a loop without end.
Speaker1	The end of one verse was the beginning of the next.
Speaker1	Get back in the closet again!
Speaker1	Back where a sin is a sin
Speaker1	Where the filthy faggots dwell
Speaker1	While they’re on their way to Hell
Speaker1	Get back in the closet again!
Speaker1	As time wore on, the counterprotesters’ will to battle us on the streets dissipated along with their numbers.
Speaker1	We began to find ourselves alone on the sidewalks.
Speaker1	Still, Gramps didn’t take victory for granted.
Speaker1	Rain or shine, Westboro members stood vigil along Gage Boulevard every day without fail.
Speaker1	We soon wore a path into the lawn, one of the first marks our picketing made on the city of Topeka—this place where the grass suddenly shifted from green and lush to trampled and dead.
Speaker1	My grandfather’s fervor was contagious, and I was proud to stand on the front lines with the church even if I didn’t always understand the message.
Speaker1	Yet the decline in direct opposition rendered pickets something of a slog for my young self, and boredom became my new enemy.
Speaker1	On days when the counters were fewer and less violent, I’d scan the ground beneath my feet for anything interesting as I walked.
Speaker1	Once, there was a small brown mass beside the circle, flies buzzing all around it, and I spent nearly the whole picket trying to figure out what it was.
Speaker1	A dead squirrel, I finally realized, making out its once-fluffy tail, now flattened and matted with blood.
Speaker1	I was glad the picket was almost over—had it been an hour?
Speaker1	Two?—and I reported to Dad, who kicked it away so I wouldn’t have to watch the carcass decay.
Speaker1	We’d be coming back.
Speaker1	From the time we first brought our signs to Gage Park, my mom was my most important interlocutor.
Speaker1	She spent a lot of time answering questions from my siblings and me, trying to explain what was going on out there: why we were picketing, why everyone was so angry, what it all meant.
Speaker1	She had my older brothers, Sam and Josh, memorizing the last fifteen verses of Romans chapter 1—a task I was spared because of my age, but I still managed to get a lot of it down: And likewise also the men, leaving the natural use of the woman, burned in their lust one toward another; men with men working that which is unseemly.
Speaker1	The only part of my mother’s explanation that really got through to me in the beginning, though, was the overarching theme of it all: that our lives were part of a never-ending struggle of the good guys against the bad.
Speaker1	The quarrel of the covenant.
Speaker1	This was the eternal conflict between the righteous and the wicked, and we would not back down.
Speaker1	As it turned out, the vast majority of the righteous had grown up at Westboro and were members of the Phelps family.
Speaker1	My father, Brent Roper, was one of the few who didn’t fit this profile: He had grown up Episcopalian.
Speaker1	He’d been best friends with my mom’s youngest brother in high school, and as he came to know my mother’s family, he found himself compelled by them.
Speaker1	A Tom Petty–loving skateboard stuntman, he ended up converting and joining Westboro when he was just sixteen.
Speaker1	It was a big decision.
Speaker1	Though the church’s anti-gay protesting was still more than a decade off, its pastor was already a controversial figure: armed with a law degree, righteous indignation, and unwavering antagonism, Gramps had a habit of collecting powerful enemies wherever he went.
Speaker1	My father had seen another side of the family, though.
Speaker1	He loved how tight-knit they were, their love and willingness to sacrifice for one another, their dedication to complete fidelity to the Scriptures.
Speaker1	Shortly after joining the church, my father took a job at Phelps-Chartered, the family law firm.
Speaker1	He would later credit his successful career in human resources to his time working there in his teens and early twenties.
Speaker1	The Phelps family taught him diligence, he said—responsibility and a proper work ethic.
Speaker1	He fell in love with my mother, and they married a short four years after he joined the church, when he was twenty and she twenty-six.
Speaker1	But only after he’d proved himself worthy to Gramps.
Speaker1	My grandfather demanded that all thirteen of his children and their spouses attend law school and continue the family business, but my mom had always had a special position at the firm.
Speaker1	She was dearly beloved by her father, and they’d had a unique relationship from the time she was young.
Speaker1	She and Gramps began to work closely together when my mom was just fourteen—and of the seven eldest Phelps children, my mom was the only one who would never abandon the church to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season.
Speaker1	She urgently took to heart a saying that her father repeated often: “The best ability is dependability.” As a result, her parents leaned on her more than any of her brothers and sisters, and she was entrusted with ever greater responsibility: keeping her siblings in line, managing the law office, taking care of the finances, and more.
Speaker1	She learned to run a tight ship, to never settle on her lees.
Speaker1	There was always something more to accomplish, and my mother was dedicated to doing it all.
Speaker1	In order to secure my grandfather’s permission to marry my mother, my dad finished high school, worked at the law office while completing a four-year bachelor’s degree in just two and a half years, and, as he told it, narrowly beat out my uncle Tim to get the last available spot in Washburn University’s law school class that year.
Speaker1	Neither my mother’s pace nor my father’s slowed after they married.
Speaker1	“I hope you will have the joy of the promise of Psalm 127,” Gramps told my parents at their wedding.
Speaker1	“As arrows are in the hand of a mighty man; so are children of the youth.
Speaker1	Happy is the man that hath his quiver full of them: they shall not be ashamed, but they shall speak with the enemies in the gate.” It was expected that there would be many children, and it was also expected that those children would be provided for.