Speaker1	After Omaha, they had gotten progressively more antagonistic, and we now exultantly sang parodies of military anthems in those tense, close quarters: “Then it’s IEDs / Your army’s on its knees / Count off the body parts all gone, two!
Speaker1	three!” I had begun to feel hesitant in those circumstances.
Speaker1	Family and friends of the fallen were passing by a hundred feet away, and it was impossible not to see their heaviness.
Speaker1	Breaching that grief-stricken silence so that we could bellow our defiance made me feel—unwillingly, involuntarily—like a terrible person.
Speaker1	I would talk myself out of it, buttressing our position with Bible verses to justify the behavior—but my mother’s tears gave me permission to feel the empathy I’d been afraid to acknowledge.
Speaker1	I was relieved to know that it wasn’t wrong to do so.
Speaker1	Less than three months later, my mother got a phone call from a reporter.
Speaker1	Our whole family was returning from another funeral picket in Illinois, and we were on the final stretch of the seven-hour drive home.
Speaker1	“Lawsuit?” my mother asked.
Speaker1	The reporter wanted to know if we had a response to the civil lawsuit that was being filed against us for protesting the funeral of a Marine in Maryland—the allegations were defamation, invasion of privacy, and intentional infliction of emotional distress.
Speaker1	It was after hours on Friday evening, but the woman had seen a copy of the complaint that would be filed in federal court come Monday morning.
Speaker1	My mother first pressed for details, and then answered with characteristic brazenness: we had the protection of the First Amendment and the foundation of Jesus Christ.
Speaker1	No one was going to stop us.
Speaker1	As soon as my mother disconnected the call, the cogs of the Westboro war machine kicked into high gear.
Speaker1	She phoned Margie and Gramps, and a plan was hatched.
Speaker1	If those men were going to file a lawsuit on Monday, we were going to respond with a press conference on Tuesday.
Speaker1	After the case was filed, I emailed and faxed out the press release Margie had drafted to national media outlets: “So long as the families, military, media, veterans groups, and community-at-large, use funerals or memorial services of dead soldiers as platforms for political patriotic pep rallies, we will continue to picket those pep rallies.
Speaker1	If they put the flags down and go home, we’ll go home.
Speaker1	Not before then.”
Speaker1	The trick was that our press conference would be at Arlington National Cemetery, where Mom, Margie, and I would simultaneously protest another soldier’s funeral.
Speaker1	This was not a move I would have thought to make, but all three of them—my grandfather, my aunt, and my mother—had an uncanny knack for finding ways to heighten the drama for the cameras.
Speaker1	Addressing journalists was always a bit nerve-racking, but I knew I wouldn’t have to worry about it much with my mom and Margie on the scene.
Speaker1	Before the lawsuit had even been filed, its effect on the church was far-reaching, momentous, instantaneous.
Speaker1	My parents, siblings, and I filed out of the van that Friday evening, into the house, and down to the church.
Speaker1	There would be a meeting to strategize about our response.
Speaker1	Gramps sat near the pulpit, wary and weary, and we took our pews near the front.
Speaker1	True to his extreme nature, my grandfather began hyperbolizing about worst-case scenarios, appearing to grow more sick with fear and paranoia by the minute.
Speaker1	Did the court have jurisdiction to force us to stand trial in Maryland?
Speaker1	What if they won?
Speaker1	Wouldn’t other families begin to sue us in other courts and jurisdictions?
Speaker1	What if they made us litigate these funeral pickets all over the country?
Speaker1	What if they bankrupted us all?
Speaker1	What were we going to do about all this?
Speaker1	Most of us waited in silence as my parents, Margie, and the rest of my aunt- and uncle-attorneys weighed in on these questions.
Speaker1	They tried to answer him calmly and reasonably, to assuage his rising panic, but the longer the meeting went on, the more they began to mirror his dread.
Speaker1	My grandfather fixed his stare on a nearby wall for a moment, and then spoke matter-of-factly into the strained silence.
Speaker1	“The Lord could just kill them, you know.”
Speaker1	And thus we began to pray for the Lord to kill the father of the Marine and his accomplices.
Speaker1	Someone googled the names of the lawyers who were filing the complaint—former JAG officers—and for the first time in all my life, we slid down off our pews and prostrated ourselves on the floor of the church sanctuary.
Speaker1	The men took turns making elaborate prayers to God to kill these men that very weekend, before they had the opportunity to attack the Lord’s church in this way.
Speaker1	We were the representatives of the Most High God, and we prayed He would show Himself strong on our behalf.
Speaker1	Our requests were made in the spirit of King David’s imprecatory prayers—prayers of cursing, invocations of the wrath of God.
Speaker1	When David was being pursued by his enemy, he prayed that the Lord would
Speaker1	Let his days be few; and let another take his office.
Speaker1	Let his children be fatherless, and his wife a widow.
Speaker1	Let his children be continually vagabonds, and beg.
Speaker1	Let there be none to extend mercy unto him: neither let there be any to favour his fatherless children.
Speaker1	Our enemies did not die over the weekend, but this pervasive doctrinal shift would affect the church for years to come, pushing us ever more to the extreme.
Speaker1	As with Westboro’s decision to shift our focus to military funeral pickets, our new imprecatory prayers caused me significant consternation—but I had trouble discerning its root.
Speaker1	King David had plainly made these prayers about his enemies, and God had called David a man after mine own heart.
Speaker1	Even Jesus Himself had promised vengeance to His people: And shall not God avenge his own elect, which cry day and night unto him?
Speaker1	I tell you that he will avenge them speedily.
Speaker1	Clearly, our imprecatory prayers were consistent with Scripture.
Speaker1	But if that was true, why did they unsettle me so?
Speaker1	This was not a line of questioning that I could pursue.
Speaker1	I was in the habit of suppressing thoughts that conflicted with the Bible as my family understood it, and by the time I was twenty, that tendency was nearly as second nature as breathing.
Speaker1	My feelings were irrelevant.
Speaker1	I would sacrifice them on the altar of submission to the church, because that was my first and foremost duty in this life.
Speaker1	As Margie had told me in the email that sat in my top drawer: “Sometimes you have to step away from being the one with all the analysis and all the answers, and just submit.”
Speaker1	It is disconcerting—shamefully, unimaginably so—to look back and accept that my fellow church members and I were collectively engaging in the most egregious display of logical blindness that I have ever witnessed.
Speaker1	I cannot account for my failure to recognize that our new imprecatory prayers were entirely and fundamentally at odds with our long-standing, oft-professed desire to love thy neighbor, that they were perfect contradictions of Jesus’s command to love your enemies.
Speaker1	Both positions had been derived from the Scriptures—but how could we have sincerely held such deeply incompatible views for so many years?
Speaker1	It should have been inconceivable in a group of Westboro’s size and intelligence.
Speaker1	Still, the partition between the piece of my mind that confessed love for my neighbors and the piece that asked God to dash the young men to pieces was vast, opaque, and impenetrable.
Speaker1	That brief spark of nagging discomfort was snuffed out, and I carried on.
Speaker1	A deceived heart hath turned him aside, that he cannot deliver his soul, nor say, Is there not a lie in my right hand?
Speaker1	I had decided to follow my mom and Margie to law school as a kindergartner, but the Snyder lawsuit was the first Westboro case I was able to follow up-close.
Speaker1	I’d been too young to understand the broader context and the legal significance of the ones that came before, even though my mother had never been hesitant to teach me about them.
Speaker1	And then as I got older, I became skeptical of my mother’s portrayals of the cases, anyway.
Speaker1	Margie had an inclination to steel-man her opponent’s arguments—depicting them in the best possible light, and then expertly dismantling them to their foundations, brick by crumbling brick—but my mother tended to straw-man.
Speaker1	She presented facts in such a way that our side came out as a paragon of virtue, and our opponents as the nadir of evil.
Speaker1	Her analysis was just too intense and one-sided to be objective, and it became important for me to read the records for myself.
Speaker1	My mother would always encourage me to do so.
Speaker1	She seemed to sense that I’d begun to view her as a bit of an unreliable narrator, but she was confident that examining the primary source material would lead me to the same conclusions she had come to.
Speaker1	As the case progressed, one point became abundantly clear: the Maryland funeral at the heart of this conflict was beset by the worst possible set of facts for the men who had filed the suit.
Speaker1	We had protested well over a hundred funerals by the time this lawsuit was filed, and there were times when only narrow spaces had separated us from our targets.
Speaker1	We’d stood in clear view of the funeral entrances where our chilling melodies had shattered the silence, echoing off church facades and into the unwilling ears of the mourners, their sorrow at the mercy of our joy:
Speaker1	God sinks your battle ships, you little wimps
Speaker1	Throw out your lifelines, boys
Speaker1	Your time has come to die, die, die, die
Speaker1	There had been no such scene at the Snyder funeral.
Speaker1	Police had “stuck us off in the north forty!” as my mother exclaimed.
Speaker1	They had used orange snow fencing to corral her and six other picketers into a small area located more than a thousand feet from the church, on public land, and there was no one around to see them but members of the media and law enforcement officers.
Speaker1	The picket was over before the funeral began, and the funeral procession had even been routed so that it didn’t pass by Westboro picketers at all.
Speaker1	A professional videographer would shoot footage showing that a hill prevented funeral-goers from seeing Westboro’s neon signs from the procession route, though the deceased’s father testified that he’d seen “the tops of them.” We took it as a signal of divine favor that this was the funeral we’d been sued for.
Speaker1	God was going to use this lawsuit as a preaching tool, and He was going to lead us to victory such that no other family would dare to take us on over this issue again.
Speaker1	At Westboro, it was all hands on deck.
Speaker1	Everyone with any skill would have a part to play.
Speaker1	My mother and Margie would be at the helm with their familiar split focus of logistics and law; the other lawyers would help Margie with research and strategy; and the young adults would do the menial but important work of transcribing news stories to use as evidence.
Speaker1	We were a well-oiled machine, always shifting to make sure that every need was met.
Speaker1	Did a mother have to work late?
Speaker1	Another would make sure her children got to the evening pickets in Topeka on time.
Speaker1	Had Margie finished writing a brief?
Speaker1	Her siblings were standing by to edit.
Speaker1	Did anyone seem pressed beyond measure?
Speaker1	Bear ye one another’s burdens, and so fulfil the law of Christ.
Speaker1	The Maryland case was a dream for a wannabe lawyer like me.
Speaker1	At the time, I was pursuing a degree in business at Washburn University, a small public institution that had been the destination for nearly all Westboro members’ post-secondary education ever since Gramps had graduated from its law school.
Speaker1	My time at Washburn didn’t fit the typical experience of college as a time of questioning and independence.
Speaker1	The university was located less than two miles from my home, and we had protested there at least weekly from the early days of our picketing ministry—an unlikely place for a Westboro member to find, or even to seek, intellectual freedom.
Speaker1	I loved that the university system allowed me to focus on classes and subjects I found most interesting, and it was an improvement over high school in other ways, as well.
Speaker1	I was only required to be on campus for classes and had almost no interaction with fellow students outside of that—which made things a lot easier for me.
Speaker1	Westboro’s beliefs and public protests had always been such a huge part of my identity, and ever more so as I got older.
Speaker1	Having to keep that mostly separated from my life at school—largely ignoring the very most important part of me—hadn’t been easy.
Speaker1	In college, I didn’t have to work nearly as hard to maintain that separation.
Speaker1	I already had far more distance from my peers, and I also felt less inhibited about using any relevant university assignments as an opportunity to detail and expound on Westboro’s activities—to address how I really saw the world.
Speaker1	I couldn’t wait to get to law school, but in the meantime, I relished learning the nuts and bolts of the Snyder case.
Speaker1	The number and scope of legal issues seemed to multiply with each passing day, but one of the central questions was whether a state’s tort law—claims of civil wrongs—could be used to punish speakers whose words and actions would otherwise be protected by the First Amendment.
Speaker1	The father of the fallen Marine claimed that Westboro’s words had caused severe emotional injury and deterioration in his health, ruined the memory of his son, and turned the funeral into “a media circus.” Could Westboro be found responsible for those damages?
Speaker1	Could we be held liable for “intruding upon the seclusion” of the Marine’s family—even though we had been standing on public land that was far from the funeral and unseen by its attendees?
Speaker1	And even if they had seen our signs, was their grief or offense enough to render our words punishable under the law?
Speaker1	In the legal arguments Margie would eventually make, the answer to these questions was a resounding “No.” She argued that even if the court considered the Snyder family to be private figures, Westboro’s speech could not give rise to a cause of action.
Speaker1	Because the Marine’s father had repeatedly made public comments about the war in Iraq and published private details about the family, “a church or anybody has the right to answer that public comment.” In protesting the young man’s funeral, church members had only stated their religious opinions on matters of public interest, which falls under “the umbrella of protection under the First Amendment that this Court has established firmly.”
Speaker1	Or as Gramps put it succinctly: “If these cockeyed lawyers can use tort law to do an end run around the First Amendment, then there is no freedom of speech in this country!”
Speaker1	During the years of the Maryland case, my mother would often send me over to Margie’s office to assist her with anything she might need.
Speaker1	It gave me the sense of being on loan from one boss to another, but the feeling was a joyful one.
Speaker1	There was no higher calling than to be useful to the church, and I cherished the time with my darling aunt as fiercely as I had when I was a little girl running errands with her around Topeka.
Speaker1	Now, though, our travels would have us marching toward the nation’s capital.
Speaker1	Westboro had lost at the trial court, and a Baltimore jury issued a stunning $10.9 million verdict against us for protesting the young marine’s funeral.
Speaker1	The world had cheered at the idea that this judgment signaled the end of the church—that after two decades of violence and threats, unlawful police actions and impotent legal shenanigans of all kinds, America had finally, finally found a way to defeat Westboro and end our picketing forever.
Speaker1	On its face, our loss seemed devastating and insurmountable—but still, the church adopted the sort of position we always took: one of exultation.
Speaker1	We were utterly amazed at what the Lord was doing to our enemies.
Speaker1	In allowing them to prevail at the trial court, He was lulling them into a false sense of hope.
Speaker1	For two years, they reveled in their victory, throwing it in our faces, certain of their triumph.
Speaker1	What fools!
Speaker1	Did they not yet understand that God was with us?
Speaker1	We knew that He would turn our apparent defeat into a victory—and their initial, illusory success would only cause them to rage all the more.
Speaker1	And thus it was.
Speaker1	Margie filed our appeal, and the appellate court ultimately reversed the trial court’s decision.
Speaker1	They set aside the multimillion-dollar judgment, declaring that Westboro’s speech was, indeed, protected by the First Amendment.
Speaker1	No matter who was offended by our religious opinion, Maryland’s tort law could not be used to circumvent our right to free speech.
Speaker1	Now Snyder v. Phelps would come before the United States Supreme Court.
Speaker1	The stakes were high, and the stage the most prestigious we’d ever had.
Speaker1	We continued to ramp up our efforts with a constant stream of nationwide protests and endless interviews requested by major media outlets from around the world.
Speaker1	We were racing to the finish line.
Speaker1	It was September 2010, and Margie and I were making our way to meet with folks from the Thomas Jefferson Center in Charlottesville, Virginia, where Margie would rehearse the tough cross-examination she expected from Justice Scalia and his colleagues.
Speaker1	The oral arguments were just a few weeks out, and she was preparing for the most daunting challenge she’d ever confronted as a lawyer, the pinnacle of her legal career.
Speaker1	On that Saturday in September, though, one that belonged more to summer than to fall, it was evident that her thoughts weren’t on the case.
Speaker1	Instead, as Margie and I walked through an idyllic university community, empty of students and full of autumn leaves in brilliant hues, she put her arm through mine and started to cry.
Speaker1	“This is it,” she said quietly.
Speaker1	“This is where I’d be.
Speaker1	If the Lord hadn’t saved me … I imagine I’d be a professor … living in a place like this, one of these houses…” She trailed off, and we both walked together like that for a time, contemplating the choices we would have made if we’d had any choice at all.
Speaker1	Margie’s words were echoes of a lament I’d been hearing from teachers and journalists for years: that a family as impressive as the Phelpses were wasting our lives and talents tormenting people on the streets.
Speaker1	How startling it was to hear it in Margie’s voice, my mind stirring with the beginnings of a subtle realization: that even among the staunchest of us, the sacrifices we made in order to be at Westboro—our insistent rejection of the world outside—weren’t quite as simple and inevitable as they had always seemed.
Speaker1	Gathered on the marble plaza in front of the U.S. Supreme Court, the throng of reporters appeared stunned, and I laughed aloud at their bewilderment.
Speaker1	Before them stood over a dozen Westboro members with my mom and Margie at the fore, all of us brimming with adrenaline and positively giddy.
Speaker1	Just behind us shone all the imposing grandeur of the Court’s edifice: broad steps leading up to a portico of Corinthian columns and a white marble façade proclaiming “Equal Justice Under Law,” evoking Greece’s Parthenon just as it was designed to.
Speaker1	Oral arguments in Snyder v. Phelps had wrapped moments earlier, and I looked over Margie’s shoulder at the assembled mass of cameras and microphones as she and my mother fielded questions from the Supreme Court press corps.
Speaker1	Margie had shown deference to the justices and respect for the Court’s pomp and pageantry while we were inside the courtroom itself, but we were back outside now.
Speaker1	Our turf.
Speaker1	When a journalist made the mistake of asking whether Westboro members ever considered the Snyder family’s feelings, the whole group of us spontaneously burst into song, as one:
Speaker1	Cryin’ ’bout your feeeeeelings
Speaker1	For your sin, no shame!
Speaker1	You’re goin’ straight to Hell on your crazy train!
Speaker1	Dozens of cameras chronicled the incongruity of the scene: the lawyer who had just calmly and cogently expounded First Amendment doctrine to the justices of the nation’s highest court, now leading a band of misfits in serenading America’s leading media outlets with a parody of “Crazy Train” by the British heavy metal vocalist Ozzy Osbourne—in three-part harmony.
Speaker1	The footage went viral, and we delighted in the fact that NBC’s camera angle had allowed it to capture one extra piece of the picture: me, standing just behind my mom and Margie, lifting my hand for a high five and laughing with a cousin who promptly indulged me.
Speaker1	“That’s our answer about feelings,” Margie told the crowd of dismayed reporters as we stood giggling just over her shoulder.
Speaker1	“Stop worshipping your feelings, and start obeying God!”
Speaker1	The Osbournes issued a statement the following day, “disgusted and appalled that WBC would use Ozzy’s music to represent such hateful and despicable beliefs.”
Speaker1	It was perfect.
Speaker1	We knew that the Court wouldn’t deliver its opinion for several months, and after a long year of litigation involving courts in Nebraska and Missouri, too, I expected something of a lull in the interim.
Speaker1	Instead, the six months following oral arguments were among the most intense the church had ever seen.
Speaker1	The explosions of media coverage wherever we roamed, the growing mobs of angry counterprotesters, the teams of journalists who continued to arrive on our doorstep—all of it was proof that God was with us, strengthening our hands for this good work, and causing our efforts to prosper.
Speaker1	I loved every second of it.
Speaker1	My place as my mother’s right hand came with high standards and high costs, but I paid them happily, growing more devoted to our cause with each passing day.
Speaker1	The world held no allure for me.
Speaker1	How could it?
Speaker1	I was squarely in the middle of a sea of activity that was being attended to by the angels of God, ministering spirits sent forth to minister for them who shall be heirs of salvation.
Speaker1	That was us: “heirs of salvation.”
Speaker1	Living in my parents’ home as a single, childless woman with a college degree and a flexible work schedule, I had the freedom and financial wherewithal to journey far and wide to propagate the church’s message.
Speaker1	A few days after we returned home from D.C., I traveled to New York to picket gays and Jews.
Speaker1	A week later, to Idaho and Washington State to protest schools.
Speaker1	Ten days after, to Michigan for Muslims and more Jews.
Speaker1	And then off to a Jewish convention in New Orleans, where God led us to a serendipitous post-picket encounter with former Israeli prime minister Ehud Barak and his security detail, pausing a few feet away to listen carefully to our somber parody of the Israeli national anthem: Wrath will soon pour on you for your awful sin / Your great affliction, it will soon begin.
Speaker1	The next week, a soldier’s funeral in Maryland.
Speaker1	A high school in Ohio.
Speaker1	A Philadelphia television studio for a debate between my mother and Senator Arlen Specter.
Speaker1	New York to be on the Mike Gallagher Show in lieu of protesting the funerals of the victims of the Tucson shooting that killed a nine-year-old girl and injured U.S. Representative Gabby Giffords.
Speaker1	The funeral of a sledding accident victim in Oklahoma.
Speaker1	The Super Bowl in Texas.
Speaker1	The Grammys.
Speaker1	The Oscars.
Speaker1	Interviews in Spanish with a television crew from Barcelona.
Speaker1	The Sundance Film Festival, where the director Kevin Smith—my longtime Twitter nemesis—counterprotested us following the premiere of his Westboro-inspired film Red State.
Speaker1	(I’d gotten Smith’s attention back in 2009, when comedians Michael Ian Black and Rainn Wilson—and their millions of followers—came after me for tweets I’d posted in celebration of World AIDS Day: “Thank God for AIDS!
Speaker1	You won’t repent of your rebellion that brought His wrath on you in this incurable scourge, so expect more & worse!” I was twenty-three, and this was some of the earliest success I’d found on Twitter.
Speaker1	When the kerfuffle reached Smith, who was best known for his films Clerks and Dogma, he launched what would become a years-long Twitter campaign to #SaveMegan, in which he regularly encouraged his millions of followers to inundate me with messages persuading me of the errors of Westboro’s ways.
Speaker1	GOD HATES PHELPS, his picket sign at Sundance read, EXCEPT MEGHAN—GOD THINKS MEGHAN’S HOT.
Speaker1	I forgave him the mockery and misspelling of my name.
Speaker1	It was good press.)
Speaker1	I traveled with my mother and Margie as guest speakers invited to university classes, to a college media convention in a Times Square hotel, and to the FBI National Academy at Quantico, whose primary purpose seemed to be a thinly veiled experiment in psychoanalysis—an attempt to understand the perspectives of extremists.
Speaker1	Each of these was a fascinating engagement with communities that had long despised us.
Speaker1	My laptop accompanied me everywhere, and I’d connect it to classroom projection systems so I could show the class in real time that the Bible really did say what we claimed it did.
Speaker1	Everywhere we ventured, it seemed, the city would explode in outrage.
Speaker1	The tongue is a fire.
Speaker1	These that have turned the world upside down are come hither also.
Speaker1	The events of those six months brought more sustained attention, exposure, and legitimacy to the church and our message than ever before, and a spirit of triumphalism and invulnerability took hold of Westboro.
Speaker1	I found myself completely in its thrall, blind to the peril until it was too late.
