Speaker1	Even we laughed at the dubious connection between the vacuum retailer and a man sentenced to jail for an anti-gay sermon preached halfway around the world, but we were determined to make those Swedes hear the truth about their Sodomite sin—and just as important, to make them feel their impotence, the futility of their resistance to our message.
Speaker1	This was God’s Word, and we were His servants.
Speaker1	They had no power to stop us.
Speaker1	No weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper; and every tongue that shall rise against thee in judgment thou shalt condemn.
Speaker1	This is the heritage of the servants of the Lord.
Speaker1	Thanks to my mother’s position in the church, our family was right in the middle of the torrent of activity surrounding Westboro.
Speaker1	A few years after the start of our picketing ministry, my grandparents had grown tired of answering the phone calls they received on the church line.
Speaker1	Prank calls and death threats came in all day long, but it was just as likely to be a journalist or live radio show.
Speaker1	My mother did her best to be good to her parents, visiting often, sending one of us kids down to the church with dinner most nights, and executing the plans that she, my grandfather, and the other elders cooked up.
Speaker1	So when my grandparents complained to her about their weariness of the phones, my mother wasn’t going to let her aging parents linger under that burden for a moment longer than necessary.
Speaker1	Although she already worked what were effectively three full-time jobs, she was willing to take on another without objection.
Speaker1	She had the church phone line forwarded to our home, and suddenly we were the ones on the receiving end of the abuse and media requests.
Speaker1	The battle lines had been redrawn, and the picket line had come into our house.
Speaker1	“Hello?” I picked up the phone just after 8 A.M. one day in sixth grade.
Speaker1	“Hey, is there an adult we can talk to?” I told the man there was not; my mother was taking my siblings to school and I was home sick.
Speaker1	He asked my age, and I told him eleven.
Speaker1	“Okay, let’s talk to you, you’re on the air!
Speaker1	What do you think about Ellen DeGeneres?” He snickered to his cohost like he’d told a clever joke.
Speaker1	I rolled my eyes.
Speaker1	Ellen had recently come out, and Gramps had put her photo on a sign after blackening out one of her teeth and drawing pockmarks all over her face.
Speaker1	“She’s a filthy dyke, and she’s going to Hell for eternity,” I said calmly, and then quoted the best clobber verse against gays from Leviticus: Thou shalt not lie with mankind, as with womankind: it is abomination.
Speaker1	I thought for a second, and then added, “Plus, she’s not funny at all.” I hadn’t seen any of Ellen’s comedy or television, but it never hurt to toss in an insult like that for good measure.
Speaker1	Margie, Gramps, and my mom gave the most articulate, powerful interviews, and I’d been listening to them long enough to know that switching things up to amp up the shock value was good strategy.
Speaker1	I reported the call to my mom when she returned home, basking in her laugh as I recounted my repartee with the radio hosts.
Speaker1	Cleverly articulating Westboro’s message would become one of the most reliable ways to earn affirmation from my mother and grandfather, and I cherished every opportunity to do so.
Speaker1	Plus, it was fun!
Speaker1	All Westboro members had to be prepared to engage reporters and passersby on the picket line, but with the forwarding of the calls, my mother became the church’s de facto spokesperson.
Speaker1	That she worked from home gave her the flexibility to field calls during the workday when almost no one else was consistently and readily available, and her willingness to take on that job meant that Westboro was in the news more than ever before.
Speaker1	One-sided conversations with members of the media would ring through our house at all hours of the day and night, our mother celebrating the hundreds of thousands of fatalities in the 2004 tsunami—the Swedish ones in particular—and cataloguing for an Australian radio station all the reasons that Heath Ledger deserved eternal torment.
Speaker1	More than one host referred to my mother’s sassy, funny, take-no-prisoners attitude as “radio gold.” Margie was the go-to backup when my mother simply couldn’t spare the time, and they would even tag-team occasionally—one of my favorite things to watch.
Speaker1	Each of the women was formidable in her own right, but together, they were indomitable.
Speaker1	I’d begun to formally work for my mother at fourteen—the same age at which she had begun to work for her father—and I both loved and resented that my place was ever at her elbow.
Speaker1	I followed her example, finding great joy in cultivating skills for the purpose of “being a good soldier in this man’s army,” as she put it.
Speaker1	I memorized phone and credit card numbers so I could rattle them off for my mom at a moment’s notice.
Speaker1	I managed the contacts on her phone and the music on her iPod.
Speaker1	I designed and maintained spreadsheets to track litigation and tax expenses, and wrote and edited Westboro press releases.
Speaker1	I learned accounting to audit the law firm accounts, and Spanish to give interviews to Univision and translate the FAQ on our church website—all before the end of my first year of college.
Speaker1	And yet, it often seemed that none of that mattered.
Speaker1	My mother could be just impossible to please, and at times I worried that I could never actually grow up under her constant gaze and micromanagement of every detail of my existence.
Speaker1	But when it worked, and all the more as I grew older and learned to accept these constraints, I would cry in gratitude to God for designing this little piece of the world for me, and me for it.
Speaker1	My heart swelled when I heard what my mother had begun to call me.
Speaker1	“Megan is my right hand,” she would say.
Speaker1	Each day I had the privilege of being saturated in our doctrines and these questions of eternal significance.
Speaker1	I often likened my mother to the hub of a wheel: all roads led to her as she went about orchestrating the day-to-day operations of the church.
Speaker1	It became my greatest treasure to support the work of this virtuous woman, to be given a front-row seat for the drama that was forever unfolding before the Church of the Lord Jesus Christ.
Speaker1	These were the wars of the Lord, and they would be remembered from everlasting to everlasting.
Speaker1	The peace I felt in my role was thanks in no small measure to Margie.
Speaker1	Given our similar personalities, she sympathized with how difficult it could get for me at home.
Speaker1	She, too, was put off by my mother’s particular, carping nature—and so when things went south with Mom, it was Margie to whom I turned for succor.
Speaker1	Nothing ever got me back on track faster than the gentle entreaties of my beloved aunt.
Speaker1	She sent me a message one day just before my twenty-fourth birthday, and I printed it out and kept it in the top drawer of my desk as a daily reminder.
Speaker1	I could hardly read my mother’s emails of correction for the dreadful cacophony they sounded in my mind, full of misplaced accusations of deliberate sabotage and the rage of ALL CAPS.
Speaker1	Margie was the epitome of kindness.
Speaker1	Of reasonableness.
Speaker1	Her email read in part:
Speaker1	Hello little Megan whom I love.
Speaker1	You have been near and dear to me since you were born, and you are one of my most favorite people in all the world.
Speaker1	More important, I am convinced God has done a work on your heart, and you desire to serve Him.
Speaker1	Like all of us, you have specific struggles in the flesh.
Speaker1	It is a piece of rebellion, and it comes out the most with your mother.
Speaker1	I know you know this, and you work at it.
Speaker1	But you hang on to a piece of pride that is a danger spot for you.
Speaker1	You wrap around the axle about how she says it or when she says it or what she says it about, and rationalize that you don’t understand why.
Speaker1	I know you know that your mother loves you dearly and watches for your soul.
Speaker1	I am so thankful that you are comfortable speaking your mind and heart to me, and never want that to go away.
Speaker1	But it would be such a disservice to you if I didn’t tell you from a few steps back that your ever-so-intense God-given-talented sweet self, you kick against the prick of your mother’s words of instruction and direction.
Speaker1	She is the boss of you, Megan, and always will be.
Speaker1	If you can’t submit yourself to her, you can’t submit yourself to this body, plain and simple.
Speaker1	Sometimes some humble, quiet submission is the order of the hour.
Speaker1	And you must work at seeing that and getting to that spot.
Speaker1	You have such a spirit of joy and rejoicing and exuberance about serving God, but when you get in that little corner of rebellion with your mom, you are like a completely different person.
Speaker1	You are tense, tight, hard, and preoccupied.
Speaker1	It’s Satan messing with you, little love.
Speaker1	And you must resist him, and you have the promise of your Creator that he will flee.
Speaker1	Obedience and submission are such sweet comfort to our soul, and such a strong antidote against the enemy we face daily called our flesh.
Speaker1	I love you, Megan, and I hope most fervently that these words are right and help your soul.
Speaker1	A soft answer turneth away wrath: but grievous words stir up anger.
Speaker1	In the middle of our second decade of daily protests, change came to Westboro.
Speaker1	To say that we had already cultivated an atmosphere of unbelievable hostility would be an understatement of epic proportions—and yet I was blind to it for many years, rationalizing it for many more.
Speaker1	Whether it came to me from Margie or my mother, my uncle Tim at a picket or Gramps from the pulpit, there was always a well-articulated justification for each extreme measure we took.
Speaker1	By my late teens, I had begun to describe Westboro as “aggressively defensive”: we were only responding to the malice that had been unfairly heaped upon us.
Speaker1	We had not started this fight, but America, “Land of the Sodomite Damned.” Steeped in a church culture that demanded we disregard, dismiss, and disdain “unacceptable” feelings of every kind—both within the church itself and among the community without—we became desensitized to the reality of the havoc we were wreaking on the lives of our targets.
Speaker1	The only pain that mattered was ours.
Speaker1	Fourteen years after we began at Gage Park, this injurious spirit prompted an expansion of our preaching.
Speaker1	Our country had declared war on God by granting its imprimatur to the sins of fornication, divorce, remarriage, homosexuality, and the “God loves everyone” lie—and in punishment for those sins, God had dragged America into two wars, the casualties of which were being mourned and their lives celebrated on the news almost daily.
Speaker1	In response, we would develop a new campaign that would bring the masses face-to-face with an aspect of our ministry that had previously been reserved for well-known figures and locals who had wronged us: our sinister celebrations of death via protests at funerals.
Speaker1	The impact of this shift was seismic, culminating in a five-year battle that would land Westboro before the nine justices of the nation’s highest court—and in the beginning, I was filled with consternation.
Speaker1	“Mom!” I urged, “Can you please slow down a little?”
Speaker1	It was the summer of 2005, and the War Room was overrun by children of all ages.
Speaker1	Westboro kids from around the neighborhood had gathered here the way they did most mornings when school was out, waiting to collect their assignments.
Speaker1	The older ones of us would stain the fences or mow the lawns or fill up holes in the yard with topsoil, while the younger ones might pick up trash, pull weeds, or chop vegetables from the garden.
Speaker1	When my mom’s almost-celestial salsa was ready, the kids would take the fruits of their labor home with them in mason jars.
Speaker1	My mother coordinated the program like a day camp for the righteous, another task she had assumed when she realized how pointless and unedifying it was for children to be idle at home, watching television and playing video games while their parents were off at work.
Speaker1	Instead she would lead us in an hour or two of maintenance work in the morning, pickets before lunch, and then we’d regroup in the Phelps-Roper basement.
Speaker1	The big room was mostly used for church gatherings, like the parties we’d throw to celebrate all the birthdays that fell during that month.
Speaker1	In the summer, we would rearrange the tables for a group Bible study my mother would lead, with Margie and other Westboro members pinch-hitting on occasion.
Speaker1	But on this July morning, I needed my mother’s attention.
Speaker1	She had just announced that our family would travel to Omaha, Nebraska, in the next day or two: we were going to protest the funeral of a soldier who had been killed in Iraq.
Speaker1	At my grandfather’s behest, Westboro had begun this crusade just a few weeks before, and I had struggled to make sense of the logic behind it.
Speaker1	“What is it, hon?” my mother pulled in close to hear me over the chattering kids.
Speaker1	“I’ve been listening to Gramps and everyone, but I just don’t get it.
Speaker1	I need to understand why we’re doing this.
Speaker1	If someone comes up to me and asks me why we’re picketing soldiers’ funerals, I’m not going to have an answer!” At nineteen, I was disturbed by the fact that I couldn’t articulate the Scriptural support for our new position.
Speaker1	I’d been picketing for fourteen years by that point.
Speaker1	I had memorized countless Bible verses and was always working on more.
Speaker1	One of my grandfather’s favorite refrains was that “The key to memorization is attention; and the key to attention is interest.” His implication was that the only cause of a failure to memorize was a failure to care—and I cared.
Speaker1	I could answer the toughest questions slung at me whether they came from a gentle stranger or an angry reporter with a microphone and a huge camera stuck in my face.
Speaker1	Be ready always to give an answer to every man that asketh you a reason of the hope that is in you with meekness and fear.
Speaker1	“Well, we better go talk about it.
Speaker1	This is an important subject, and it’s gonna keep coming up.
Speaker1	And if you’ve got this question, I’m sure these other kids do, too.”
Speaker1	A while later, my siblings and I were seated in our usual places around the living room, Bibles open and ready to listen.
Speaker1	“Okay, children,” our mother began, “we are going to connect the dots here!” And that’s what she proceeded to do for the next half hour.
Speaker1	The dots, my mother explained, were (A) sin, and (B) punishment.
Speaker1	These two were inextricably connected, and the former was the proximate cause of the latter.
Speaker1	(This was the actual vocabulary my mother used when she spoke to us; as an admirer of beautiful words, I found it a sincere joy.)
Speaker1	Moses had once given the children of Israel an ultimatum: Behold, I set before you this day a blessing and a curse; A blessing, if ye obey the commandments of the Lord your God … And a curse, if ye will not obey the commandments of the Lord your God.
Speaker1	So far, so good.
Speaker1	This had been part of our reasoning for protesting all along: warning the world that their sin would bring the curses of God upon them.
Speaker1	“I think we understand that part,” I told my mother.
Speaker1	“But why soldiers’ funerals specifically?”
Speaker1	“Well, can we all agree that a dead child is a curse from God, and not a blessing?” she asked.
Speaker1	We all nodded.
Speaker1	She’d begun to use the word “child” to describe the dying soldiers, because a significant portion of them were exceedingly young.
Speaker1	Many were around my age and even younger.
Speaker1	“Okay, now flip over to Hosea chapter nine,” my mother instructed.
Speaker1	I read along with her and began to memorize: They have deeply corrupted themselves … therefore [God] will remember their iniquity, he will visit their sins.
Speaker1	Though they bring up their children, yet will [he] bereave them, that there shall not be a man left.
Speaker1	“America has deeply corrupted themselves!
Speaker1	Adultery, fornication, fags, and so forth.
Speaker1	They worship those sins, and now the Lord is visiting them for it—and one of the weapons in His arsenal is killing their soldiers in battle!”
Speaker1	They chose new gods; then was war in the gates.
Speaker1	For there fell down many slain, because the war was of God.
Speaker1	If thou wilt not hearken unto the voice of the Lord, he shall cause thee to be smitten before thine enemies.
Speaker1	I wrote the verses down.
Speaker1	I would repeat them again and again until they stuck.
Speaker1	“And there is one more piece to this picture, children,” my mother continued.
Speaker1	“Most of these military deaths are being executed by I-E-Ds.
Speaker1	‘Improvised—explosive—devices.’ It means homemade bombs.
Speaker1	Do you remember that this evil nation bombed this church with an IED ten years ago?
Speaker1	Back then, people didn’t even know what an IED was.
Speaker1	And now everyone knows!
Speaker1	That, children, is the vengeance of God.
Speaker1	It is the picture of that verse that talks about their violence coming back on their own heads.
Speaker1	Can somebody look that up?” It only took me a few seconds to find it.
Speaker1	His mischief shall return upon his own head, and his violent dealing shall come down upon his own pate.
Speaker1	Vengeance is mine; I will repay, saith the Lord.
Speaker1	The righteous shall rejoice when he seeth the vengeance: he shall wash his feet in the blood of the wicked.
Speaker1	This last piece of the puzzle was not so compelling to me.
Speaker1	Although I understood and believed the verses about God’s avenging of His people, my mother and grandfather seemed to vastly overstate the magnitude of the bomb incident each time it came up.
Speaker1	I was nine years old when a few college students set off a pipe bomb in our driveway, blowing small holes in the fence and in our van.
Speaker1	The blast was strong enough to shake off heavy wall hangings just over the bassinet of my new brother, Gabe, four days old and sleeping in my parents’ bedroom just over the driveway.
Speaker1	It had been unnerving to be sure, and perhaps I’d just grown accustomed to glossing over such incidents—but to claim that this was the cause of the suffering of the entire United States military felt exaggerated and uncomfortably arrogant.
Speaker1	I thought it was better to focus on the main cause—that protesting soldiers’ funerals was about America’s disobedience to God, showing the causal connection between the nation’s sins and its military deaths.
Speaker1	I suspected others felt the same, because Mom and Gramps were the only ones I ever heard making the argument about the pipe bomb.
Speaker1	“I understand now,” I told my mother.
Speaker1	“What time do we leave for Omaha on Saturday?”
Speaker1	The military pickets quickly took over our schedule.
Speaker1	Within ten weeks of the first funeral, Westboro had dispatched nearly two dozen groups of protesters, everywhere from Caldwell, Idaho, to Marblehead, Massachusetts.
Speaker1	Hundreds more would come in the years that followed.
Speaker1	We gathered a team of aunts and cousins, designing an entire apparatus whereby we could keep abreast of the protest opportunities.
Speaker1	Given the last-minute, fast-unfolding nature of the events—the bodies would need to be buried quickly—we would have to be prepared to act in an instant.
Speaker1	We decided that one of my aunts would monitor the deaths announced on the Department of Defense website, and assign individual soldiers to church volunteers on a rotating basis.
Speaker1	These volunteers would then search the media for information about the soldiers as well as their funeral announcements.
Speaker1	As soon as they had the time and place of a funeral in hand, they would call my mother or me and we’d swiftly resolve the question: Would we be able to make the trip to picket this funeral?
Speaker1	The result depended almost entirely on logistics.
Speaker1	Was the funeral occurring in a place we could reach by car in ten hours or less?
Speaker1	If so, the answer was generally yes.
Speaker1	Were the tickets to fly there prohibitively expensive?
Speaker1	If so, the answer was usually no.
Speaker1	Was the funeral yesterday?
Speaker1	Clearly, this picket was not meant to be—but we would need to be more vigilant if we didn’t want these opportunities to elude us.
Speaker1	If a given trip seemed possible, my mother would send a message to church members and ask who, if anyone, could go.
Speaker1	Our decisions were based on the same constraints that govern the lives of every other red-blooded American: work and school obligations, the availability of vacation time, how much travel we had already scheduled ourselves for, and money.
Speaker1	Other than parents for their minor children, we each paid our own way.
Speaker1	(Although on one occasion, an older cousin of mine used his work bonus to distribute birthday gift certificates granting the recipient up to $200 toward a picketing plane ticket.
Speaker1	Elation!)
Speaker1	If at least three people could attend, my mother and I would immediately begin assembling the necessary elements for the trip: plane tickets, hotel and rental car reservations, driving directions, and all of the biographical information published about the soldier in the media.
Speaker1	The travelers would need to know just what sort of sinfulness the deceased had been up to in the event that anyone were to ask why we were picketing this soldier specifically.
Speaker1	If Mom wasn’t sure, she tended to go with the catchall: “You mean it isn’t enough that he was fighting for a nation that has institutionalized sin and made God their number one enemy?”
Speaker1	The outpouring of fury and grief at these protests startled me in the beginning.
Speaker1	We stood near the church in Omaha and lifted up our new signs—THANK GOD FOR IEDS, THANK GOD FOR DEAD SOLDIERS—but the scene was devoid of our usual protest antics.
Speaker1	We did not sing parodies.
Speaker1	We did not dance atop the American flag.
Speaker1	We did not call across the narrow street to the soldiers standing just outside the church’s entrance.
Speaker1	They watched us with bitter contempt, and I couldn’t recall seeing anything quite like it in all my years on the picket line.
Speaker1	The family arrived in a limousine, stepped out, turned.
Speaker1	Though there were police officers stationed between us and them, the close quarters felt like a tinderbox.
Speaker1	Both sides afraid to speak, both sides afraid to make any quick movements lest the precarious peace erupt into all-out war.
Speaker1	It was only a matter of time before it did.
Speaker1	As a result of our new campaign and the attention and hostility it generated, violence against Westboro spiked again—including arson this time, the most aggressive act perpetrated against the church.
Speaker1	Investigators never found whoever was responsible for setting the church garage on fire in the wee hours one August morning, but the fire department arrived to put out the flames within minutes—tipped off by a woman in a nearby drive-through.
Speaker1	An electrician arrived the next morning to get the power running again, but as he surveyed the damage, he seemed disturbed.
Speaker1	When my mother asked why, he pointed to the narrow space—just four feet—between the charred edge of the damage and the electrical wiring.
Speaker1	“If that fire had lasted any longer, the whole block would have gone up.” I’d been shaken watching the blaze and billowing smoke in my pajamas at 1 A.M., but my feelings turned to outrage and defiance with the electrician’s words.
Speaker1	Anyone who thought they could scare us out of serving the Lord didn’t know Westboro or God.
Speaker1	Although the arsonists had failed in their attempt to destroy the church with fire, a team of attorneys were determined to use the courts to do the same.
Speaker1	Less than a year after our first military funeral protest, a twenty-year-old Marine was killed in a Humvee accident in Iraq.
Speaker1	His name appeared on the DoD website, instantly becoming grist for the Westboro funeral mill.
Speaker1	The query seeking picketers went forth, the plane tickets were purchased, and the news releases were faxed to media outlets all over the state of Maryland.
Speaker1	My grandfather had a way of distilling a message down to its essence, and thus he did in the news release announcing our protest at the funeral of Lance Corporal Matthew Snyder: “They turned America over to fags; they’re coming home in body bags.”
Speaker1	Late on the evening that my mother returned from that funeral picket in Maryland, we sat at our adjacent desks in the still house.
Speaker1	My siblings had gone off to their rooms to settle into bed, and Mom and I were winding down, as well.
Speaker1	I got up and walked a few paces to stand behind her chair, put my hands on her shoulders, and squeezed gently.
Speaker1	She was exhausted.
Speaker1	Her head slumped forward while I worked on her neck and shoulders, and after a moment, she spoke softly.
Speaker1	She had wept in the car on the way to the funeral, she told me.
Speaker1	As she drove, one of her travel mates had read aloud the news stories published about the young soldier.
Speaker1	“The father called his son ‘the love of my life.’” My mother’s voice took on that quality of desperate urgency again, of lamentation.
Speaker1	“I am a mother.
Speaker1	I have eleven children.
Speaker1	I get that.” She shook her head.
Speaker1	“It is just so sorrowful what these people have done to their children.
Speaker1	Does he not understand that his sins have brought the wrath of God down upon his head?
Speaker1	Upon his son’s head?
Speaker1	Somebody has to tell them!”
Speaker1	I was taken aback to hear that she had cried.
Speaker1	This was not the sort of spirit we displayed at funeral pickets.