Speaker1	To my mind, it was now undeniable that the elders’ decisions were primarily driven not by Scripture, but by a need to keep church members in our place.
Speaker1	To make us understand that bending to their will was the only option.
Speaker1	Nothing else mattered.
Speaker1	Justin and I tried to orchestrate the circumstances of a church-sanctioned apology from Grace to Lindsey: we would each separately and cautiously reach out to my parents.
Speaker1	We were still trying to make it fit.
Speaker1	Still hoping we could make it work.
Speaker1	But it wasn’t to be.
Speaker1	When I gently approached my father that evening, he blew up.
Speaker1	He had heard enough from me about the issue.
Speaker1	I retreated with the same feeling I’d gotten almost every time I’d challenged his decisions over the previous year: that hardliners like Steve and Sam were behind this new authoritarianism.
Speaker1	When I disputed elder edicts, my father’s choices were limited to either shutting me down or resisting the militant faction among the elders—and we both knew how the latter would go.
Speaker1	He also just seemed convinced that their collective wisdom had to be correct.
Speaker1	After all, this was the Lord’s church.
Speaker1	And on top of everything else, he was surely as exhausted with the whole mess as my mother, Grace, and I all were.
Speaker1	“Time to despair,” I wrote to Justin that night.
Speaker1	“There was a blowup (no one knows about any of our discussions, though).
Speaker1	Abort mission.
Speaker1	I’m so sorry, friend.” Justin responded that he was at a loss.
Speaker1	Miserable.
Speaker1	Hopeless.
Speaker1	We’d reached the end of the line, but he thanked me for even making the effort.
Speaker1	“Take care,” he said.
Speaker1	I told Grace everything just before bed, breaking down when I got to the part about our father.
Speaker1	In our estimation, he was one of only two or three elders who took to heart that verse about humility—in lowliness of mind let each esteem other better than themselves—and it contributed to his unwillingness to challenge the others.
Speaker1	“They should have been learning his compassion!” I wept bitterly.
Speaker1	Instead, they had insisted he take on their severity.
Speaker1	I slumped onto the bed beside my sister and pressed my face into a pillow.
Speaker1	She reached over to stroke my back, and as we lay there in silence for a moment, I realized it wasn’t just the change in my father that I was mourning.
Speaker1	It was the final crumbling of an image I had held so long in mind.
Speaker1	Westboro Baptist Church.
Speaker1	Special interest of the Almighty.
Speaker1	Uniquely guided to eternal triumph by God Himself.
Speaker1	Sordid.
Speaker1	Base.
Speaker1	Banal.
Speaker1	Human.
Speaker1	Making the decision to leave gave me greater boldness in my futile attempts at reform, but it also introduced yet another impossible question:
Speaker1	When?
Speaker1	Neither Grace nor I had an answer—just a growing list of reasons that it couldn’t be now.
Speaker1	We couldn’t leave before Mom’s birthday, surely.
Speaker1	And what about our parents’ anniversary?
Speaker1	How cruel it would be to ruin everything right at this moment.
Speaker1	And then there were the things we couldn’t bear to leave without, all that we would forever lose access to once we left.
Speaker1	What about family recipes?
Speaker1	And home movies?
Speaker1	And old photos?
Speaker1	We should wait just a little while longer …
Speaker1	There was no denying that this was partly a stalling tactic, based on a dwindling hope that drastic change would occur and save us from our plans.
Speaker1	At the first prospect of losing everyone back in July, Grace and I had become painfully aware that there was so much we didn’t know about our parents’ lives, and our grandmother’s.
Speaker1	What did we know about our Gran’s life before Westboro?
Speaker1	My sisters and I had begun interviewing her almost immediately after I spoke my treason to Grace.
Speaker1	We’d file across the backyard in the evening, past the yellow slide and the pool filled with splashing cousins, and into the church.
Speaker1	We’d find Gran upstairs in her bedroom next to the church library where Gramps held a Bible study at 7:30 each morning.
Speaker1	At eighty-six, our grandmother was so quiet and gentle.
Speaker1	Smaller than I’d ever seen her because of the deep curve in her spine.
Speaker1	Stooped with age.
Speaker1	She’d lie on her bed, and Grace would lie next to her, Bekah on the floor at the foot of the bed and me at its head.
Speaker1	I’d switch on my iPhone’s recorder, and we’d take turns asking questions, and I’d try not to choke at the thought of losing my Gran, at the tsunami of guilt washing over me for even thinking of betraying her.
Speaker1	I started recording everything.
Speaker1	Hymn-singing practices.
Speaker1	The sounds of our monthly birthday parties.
Speaker1	Evening Bible study.
Speaker1	My mother’s stories about my siblings and me when we were young.
Speaker1	A prayer she said for me.
Speaker1	The din inside the van on picket trips.
Speaker1	Bekah reading aloud.
Speaker1	The repartee of my little brothers.
Speaker1	Even if I somehow got them back later—even if they eventually left—all the years of their little-boy voices would be gone.
Speaker1	An endless stream of photos.
Speaker1	A family kickball game.
Speaker1	Mom and Luke getting ready to walk to school one morning.
Speaker1	My parents holding hands as they walked through a department store.
Speaker1	A family visit to our favorite art museum in Kansas City.
Speaker1	Milkshake parties with Gran and Gramps.
Speaker1	Walks to the park with my nieces and nephew.
Speaker1	The front porch where Grace and I ate breakfast each morning.
Speaker1	A trip out for snow cones with Luke.
Speaker1	In those months, every joyful experience became a torture that left Grace and me in tears and gasping for breath.
Speaker1	We’d huddle together on my bed like that, trying to remember what it was like before all this.
Speaker1	What it was like to be happy without the inescapable sense that we were watching the slow, excruciating deaths of everyone we loved.
Speaker1	I began obsessively taking notes to chronicle every moment.
Speaker1	I filled notebooks with descriptions of routine interactions, terrified of losing even a single one.
Speaker1	As if clinging to these memories might alleviate the agony.
Speaker1	As if recording it all could keep them from slipping from my grasp.
Speaker1	I made a list entitled “Funny/Nice Things Said During Hugs.” Gran, on how she could always count on me to smell good.
Speaker1	Gramps, on how my curls in his face made it difficult to breathe—how he was going to drown in them someday.
Speaker1	Mom, on how she didn’t mind being smothered by them.
Speaker1	Dad, on how he loved it when I finished his sentences.
Speaker1	“I love you, Mimi,” he said.
Speaker1	It was the name Luke had given me as a toddler, when he couldn’t pronounce mine correctly.
Speaker1	“We’re very fortunate to have you as a daughter.” I wrote it down before he could regret it.
Speaker1	Before he could take it back.
Speaker1	Before he could take down the photos of me that hung on the walls, before he could repurpose my bedroom, before he could spend the rest of his life erasing me from his memory as much as possible.
Speaker1	I started to clean out my room.
Speaker1	I had never moved anywhere in my life, and I didn’t know how anyone ever did it.
Speaker1	It took weeks, because I pored over everything.
Speaker1	Old photo albums.
Speaker1	Shoeboxes full of birthday cards and thank you notes I’d been saving since elementary school.
Speaker1	I scrutinized every page of the baby book my father had been maintaining for me since I was born.
Speaker1	He added to it every year, and it was full to bursting by now, outgrowing the three-inch leather binder he’d bought to expand it.
Speaker1	Our family grew larger each time I flipped to a new page, until I came to something I didn’t recognize.
Speaker1	A note my father had slipped in two months earlier, back in August.
Speaker1	Dear Miss Megan,
Speaker1	Thank you for all the kind things you do for me.
Speaker1	I love you dearly.
Speaker1	I don’t say either of those things enough.
Speaker1	We are so fortunate.
Speaker1	Your mother and I love you so much!
Speaker1	Love, Dad
Speaker1	A little at a time, Grace and I began packing our things in boxes.
Speaker1	My sister made labels that said things like “shoes” or “books.” I numbered my boxes, meticulously cataloguing every single item that went into each one (“Shoes—Blue Wedge Heels from Jael’s Wedding”).
Speaker1	I tucked each piece of jewelry I owned into a tiny white envelope labeled with the date and occasion on which I’d received it.
Speaker1	If I ever forgot any detail, there would be no one around to remind me.
Speaker1	I copied sixty-three DVDs’ worth of home movies, watching scene after scene play like a funeral reel.
Speaker1	And all the while I knew what would happen when we left.
Speaker1	I knew the heartbreak they would feel, and the betrayal.
Speaker1	I had felt it when Josh left eight years earlier—a devastating postmortem that went on for weeks after he left.
Speaker1	We had racked our brains looking for every sign of his duplicity.
Speaker1	And with each new instance we found, we had transformed our horror into outrage.
Speaker1	All of us who remained were disgusted with his perfidy.
Speaker1	How could he?
Speaker1	What sort of monster could pretend to be one of us, knowing all the while that he was going to abandon us forever?
Speaker1	It did not occur to us to think of his devastation.
Speaker1	We couldn’t see his terror, or his despair, or his desperation.
Speaker1	It was so much easier to rewrite history and cast him as a villain.
Speaker1	To insist that he didn’t care about us.
Speaker1	That he was a selfish jerk who wanted only to pursue his own lusts.
Speaker1	We could not imagine that this nineteen-year-old boy could have a legitimate reason to leave the only Church of the Lord Jesus Christ in the world today.
Speaker1	We could not consider that there was anything truly wrong with us.
Speaker1	My parents, my brothers, my sister, my Gramps and my Gran—they would all look back just like I had.
Speaker1	They would see me copying those home movies.
Speaker1	Interviewing Gran.
Speaker1	Cleaning out my bedroom.
Speaker1	They would search through all the text messages and emails I had sent.
Speaker1	They would remember my tears and my refusal to tweet, and they would wonder how I ever could have looked them in the eye.
Speaker1	They wouldn’t understand that I’d wanted to tell them everything.
Speaker1	That I’d tried so hard to keep them.
Speaker1	That I’d been begging for change.
Speaker1	That I’d wanted to stay.
Speaker1	November dawned, and Grace and I couldn’t hold on anymore.
Speaker1	Steve had announced a new round of Sign Movies—short videos, each featuring a member of the church explaining one of Westboro’s signs—and asked all members to choose which sign they wanted to address.
Speaker1	Grace and I both signed up, but we knew we wouldn’t go through with it.
Speaker1	The videos would be filmed November 23 to 25, so we had until then.
Speaker1	Less than three weeks.
Speaker1	We didn’t know it yet, but we wouldn’t make it even that long.
Speaker1	At the end of September, as Grace and I were starting to plan our exit in earnest, it became clear to me that Justin and Lindsey wouldn’t last at Westboro.
Speaker1	Especially from the perspective of an outsider, their treatment must have seemed so bizarre and unjustified.
Speaker1	Why would they tolerate it indefinitely?
Speaker1	So I reached out to Justin, ever so cautiously, to see if they were going to leave, too.
Speaker1	They were.
Speaker1	We started talking.
Speaker1	First Justin and I.
Speaker1	Then Lindsey and I.
Speaker1	But Lindsey still didn’t want to talk to Grace.
Speaker1	She was still suspicious.
Speaker1	I told Lindsey that Grace had assured me there had never been anything more than friendship with Justin, and that I believed her.
Speaker1	On the day that Grace finally spoke with Justin for the first time since May, I sent her a message:
Speaker1	MEGAN: Dear Gracie, Just in case I don’t get back before you leave, a word of caution (as if you needed any more…): be careful with what you say to Justin.
Speaker1	I know you’re cautious and discreet, and I know you wouldn’t deliberately do anything to hurt a friend.
Speaker1	Just be careful not to put him in a position to be secretive or duplicitous to his wife; distrust—especially in that kind of relationship—is poison.
Speaker1	No matter what, you’re a likely temptation.
Speaker1	Sweet, charming, beautiful, talented, funny, and more.
Speaker1	All those things + closeness to Justin = easy for Lindsey to suspect something.
Speaker1	Make your conduct above reproach, and (if she’ll give you the opportunity again) be her friend.
Speaker1	Make sure she knows she can trust you.
Speaker1	You’re a good person.
Speaker1	And you want good for people, and you want to *be* good to people.
Speaker1	It’s hard for me to believe that there’s a person in the world you couldn’t win over.
Speaker1	You probably didn’t need all this—but sometimes you say obvious things to me, and it helps me be focused and think clearly.
Speaker1	Love you, Sun.
Speaker1	Given that we still weren’t allowed to speak, the four of us began a disjointed discussion about our plans.
Speaker1	Justin and Lindsey wanted to move to North Carolina, and at first the dream was for the five of us to buy a house together.
Speaker1	I would get a job, and the other three adults would go to school, and Grace and I would help take care of Justin and Lindsey’s sweet baby boy.
Speaker1	If we were living with our good friends—people who knew this life, who knew our family, who understood what it meant to leave them—then maybe we wouldn’t be so lonely.
Speaker1	The problem was that the more time passed, the more strained these relationships became.
Speaker1	The four of us could hardly keep ourselves together under the intense pressure, let alone be a support for the others.
Speaker1	Desperate for help dealing with the emotional fallout of our decision, Grace and I reached out to one of our old high school English teachers.
Speaker1	Whereas most of our teachers had preferred to ignore Westboro’s existence while we were in school, Keith Newbery had been one of the very few who hadn’t been afraid of the subject.
Speaker1	He was a bit of a gentle giant—a former offensive lineman for Washburn’s football team when he was in college—and though he was less than a decade older than me, I had a sense of him as an older, wiser, calming presence.
Speaker1	In school, he had never shared his beliefs or tried to shame us for ours; he just asked thoughtful questions when related issues came up in our homework or in the news.
Speaker1	Twitter had opened an even closer line of communication with Newbery, and we’d kept up with him there over the previous year.
Speaker1	He ran an account called @TchrQuotes (“Teacher Quotes”), which he filled with sarcastic riffs on things his students said.
Speaker1	His posts were funny and inoffensive—“Nobody in this meeting knows I have a McChicken in my pocket.”—but whenever he tweeted me in a friendly tone, he was vehemently attacked by Westboro’s critics.
Speaker1	That this cycle never dissuaded him from his kindness was part of what made Grace and me believe that we could trust him.
Speaker1	Newbery was everything we could have hoped and more: a calm, rational, dependable third party.
Speaker1	Objective.
Speaker1	Someone who knew us, and our history, and our family, and who wanted to help us, whatever we decided.
Speaker1	We started moving boxes into his family’s garage in late October, with the understanding that if Westboro changed, we would bring them all back.
Speaker1	I could hardly think straight during that time, and I unleashed onto Newbery all of the thoughts and fears and sorrows and grief that I couldn’t subject my sister to.
Speaker1	He was a voice of compassion and reason when we needed it most—which was fortunate because confusion was mounting.
Speaker1	Justin explained that he and Lindsey were splitting up.
Speaker1	The last several months had been too much pressure on their relationship.
Speaker1	They were both planning to move to North Carolina, but now to different cities.
Speaker1	Now what?
Speaker1	I still wanted to help them, but getting into the middle of an increasingly messy situation seemed like a bad idea.
Speaker1	I started to back off.
Speaker1	Maybe we’d just have to go our own way after all.
Speaker1	But then Justin sent a message to Grace on her twentieth birthday: he wanted to be more than friends.
Speaker1	I was aghast.
Speaker1	He was a worldly twenty-eight-year-old, married, with a young son.
Speaker1	She was naïve, much younger than her years, and was on the verge of losing everything, still living in an impossibly controlling home under even more scrutiny than usual.
Speaker1	How could he possibly do this—especially now?
Speaker1	I thought of Lindsey.
Speaker1	I had told her there was nothing between Justin and Grace.
Speaker1	I could not imagine being in her place.
Speaker1	She had come to Westboro looking for God, and she was leaving a year later with her world a shambles.
Speaker1	I could not believe what had happened to her.
Speaker1	I was ashamed of all of us.
Speaker1	Justin was not pleased to find out I was discouraging Grace.
Speaker1	He insisted that he and Lindsey had been planning to split anyway, independent of Grace.
Speaker1	He’d told me about their split weeks ago, remember?
Speaker1	Why was I trying to control my sister the way our family controlled us?
Speaker1	Hadn’t I spent my whole life telling other people how to live?
Speaker1	Who did I think I was?
Speaker1	It quickly became a moot point as everything unraveled at once.
Speaker1	The relationship between Justin and Grace existed mostly by text, and lasted about two weeks before Grace ended it—but after it was over, Lindsey found out.
Speaker1	The email came a few days later.
Speaker1	“Dear WBC…”
Speaker1	November 11, 2012.
Speaker1	3:55 P.M. Sunday.
Speaker1	I knew we had come to the end of the line as soon as I heard my father’s voice.
Speaker1	Stern.
Speaker1	Gruff.
Speaker1	Urgent.
Speaker1	He threw open the door to my bedroom, and my head snapped up.
Speaker1	Grace and I were crying again, and she was scratching my head.
Speaker1	“You need to come talk.” Eyes wide.
Speaker1	He turned on his heel and headed down the hall.
Speaker1	Grace and I looked at each other and tried to dry our faces.
Speaker1	We followed him to my parents’ bedroom, where Mom was sitting in the new rocking chair.
Speaker1	“It’s okay, it’s okay.” Her words were quick and urgent, too.
Speaker1	We all sat down in their little sitting area, Grace and I on one side and our parents on the other.
Speaker1	Dad started reading an email that Lindsey had sent him.
Speaker1	About Grace and Justin.
Speaker1	About our plans to leave.
Speaker1	Things that were true mixed with things that were not.
Speaker1	I was looking down, listening, shaking my head, knowing that we had to leave immediately.
Speaker1	I looked up, and my mother was holding her phone.
Speaker1	A moment later, I heard the sound that an iPhone plays when you start recording a video.
Speaker1	“Please don’t,” I whispered.
Speaker1	She apologized.
Speaker1	She’d meant to take a photo.
Speaker1	My father continued to read.
Speaker1	I understood why my mother had said, It’s okay, it’s okay.
Speaker1	Because there was hope for me.
Speaker1	I could have repented.
Speaker1	But there was no saving Grace.
Speaker1	After this email, there was no possibility she wouldn’t be voted out.
Speaker1	I looked at my sister and spoke in a low voice.
Speaker1	“We need to go.”
Speaker1	Our father hadn’t heard.
Speaker1	Our mother had.
Speaker1	I looked up.
Speaker1	I watched her mouth drop open in a look of shocked horror that will haunt me until I die.
Speaker1	I’d thought she might know.
Speaker1	After all our talks, I’d thought she might see it coming.
Speaker1	She had not.
Speaker1	We filed back to our bedrooms to pack.
Speaker1	We’d moved around twenty boxes out already, but there was so much more.
Speaker1	We tried to stay together.
Speaker1	We knew people would come to try to talk us out of leaving.
Speaker1	But we were sobbing, not thinking clearly, and Grace darted into her room next door.
Speaker1	Sam and Steve in the hall.
Speaker1	Steve pushed the door open.
Speaker1	I pushed it closed and kept packing.
Speaker1	He pushed it open again, and wouldn’t let me close it this time.
Speaker1	They were yelling, saying that I knew better than this.
Speaker1	My face was so contorted that I couldn’t form sounds to make words.
Speaker1	They left.
Speaker1	Grace would tell me later that she’d asked our father to make them go.
Speaker1	She’d heard them yelling in the hall.
Speaker1	“She doesn’t want to talk to them!” she told Dad.
Speaker1	My mom came in and asked that I go talk to Gramps.
Speaker1	That didn’t I owe him that?
Speaker1	I’d known this was coming.
Speaker1	Mom had made others on the cusp of leaving do it in the past.
Speaker1	A last-ditch effort to convince them to stay.
Speaker1	How could anyone look at our beloved Gran and Gramps and say they were leaving?
Speaker1	I wanted to say no.
Speaker1	I looked at her face.
Speaker1	I couldn’t.
Speaker1	I walked across the yard with her, not registering that this would be my last time.
Speaker1	This path I’d traversed, often several times a day, since I was a child.
Speaker1	Down the sidewalk, past the trampolines and the green cover over the pool, in the kitchen door, and up the stairs.
Speaker1	My mother was telling me that I didn’t have to follow Grace out the door.
Speaker1	We sat down with Gran and Gramps in his bedroom, the television blaring as always.
Speaker1	He shut it off.
Speaker1	Mom tried to explain.
Speaker1	She thought this was because of Justin.
Speaker1	She didn’t understand that he was nothing.
Speaker1	Absolutely nothing.
Speaker1	That we would never give her up for a boy.
Speaker1	That we would never hurt her for a boy.
Speaker1	Gran, so quiet, disbelieving.
Speaker1	“You don’t want to leave us, do you?” I wept harder at her gentleness.
Speaker1	I couldn’t breathe.
Speaker1	“You’re not gonna do this…?”
Speaker1	I hugged her as hard as I could.
Speaker1	“I’m sorry, Granny!” I sobbed into her ear.
Speaker1	“Please,” she whispered.
Speaker1	“Meg…?” Mom said.
Speaker1	I had lived to support them.
Speaker1	There was no worse anguish than causing them pain.
Speaker1	I will never know grief worse than seeing the pain I was causing.
Speaker1	Hearing the hope in their words, and knowing that it was too late.
Speaker1	“We can’t let you go, honey.” Gran held me tight.
Speaker1	“We’ll be so sorry if you go.” She paused.
Speaker1	“Why?” Nonplussed.
Speaker1	I tried to explain.
Speaker1	I had wanted to tell them openly for months.
Speaker1	I had determined that if I couldn’t make my objections while I stayed, then I would explain them in detail when I left.
Speaker1	Maybe then they would listen.
Speaker1	Maybe then they would understand.
Speaker1	But I couldn’t say more than a few words at a time.
Speaker1	“She basically says that she feels hopeless,” my mother said.