Speaker1	I did not dare to look across the table, which felt to me like a shield.
Speaker1	The first row of chairs sat just on the other side of it, the closest faces only a few feet away.
Speaker1	Grace said little until David asked about leaving our family.
Speaker1	I tried to be vague so as to avoid openly weeping, but she spoke up suddenly and passionately, until it felt like we were both drowning in it again.
Speaker1	“We’ll answer some questions in a minute,” David said, as Grace and I collected ourselves, “but the last thing I wanted to share is a revelation I had this week during my conversations with Megan and Grace.
Speaker1	To be honest: I don’t know if I could do what they did.
Speaker1	If I had been raised the way that they were raised, I would’ve been out there holding signs with Grandpa Phelps, too.
Speaker1	If I was brought up in their family, would I have the strength of character and the moral fortitude to leave my family?
Speaker1	To leave everything I’ve ever known?” He shook his head.
Speaker1	“I want to say that I would have, but I don’t know.”
Speaker1	When I finally looked across the table, my eye was drawn instantly to a woman a few rows back.
Speaker1	I recognized her as one of the counterprotesters from three years earlier.
Speaker1	Long dark hair.
Speaker1	Sharp brown eyes.
Speaker1	She had been part of the group that had surrounded me, grabbing for my signs, pushing and pressing in on me.
Speaker1	It had been her face, twisted in disgust, that had been screaming into mine while those two old women whispered in my ears.
Speaker1	I felt my skin crawl, my stomach clenching as fear and betrayal surfaced again.
Speaker1	Some of these people had attacked my family.
Speaker1	What was I doing here?
Speaker1	But the woman’s face wasn’t vengeful now.
Speaker1	It was splotchy with tears.
Speaker1	As David began to call on audience members with questions, I was moved to find similar expressions on faces all over the room.
Speaker1	Not angry.
Speaker1	Mournful.
Speaker1	They framed their questions with kindness.
Speaker1	They offered forgiveness.
Speaker1	Again and again, they expressed the hope that if we could change, then others could, too.
Speaker1	Many would find Grace and me later, embrace after embrace, and tell us their stories of Westboro.
Speaker1	Students with LGBT friends driven to self-harm by an atmosphere of intolerance we had fed.
Speaker1	A twenty-something whose parents had forced him from his home when he’d come out as gay—“I know what it feels like to lose your family,” he said as he wrapped me in a bear hug.
Speaker1	“You’re not alone.” A U.S. Marine who had witnessed Westboro’s presence at the funeral of his friend.
Speaker1	It had been over a year, he told me, and still he had so much rage.
Speaker1	He couldn’t turn on a dime and let it all go, but it helped him to understand.
Speaker1	He believed he could find peace now.
Speaker1	Most shocking of all would be the handful of apologies.
Speaker1	Some had accosted me on Twitter, others outside the festival three years earlier.
Speaker1	“I didn’t know,” they said.
Speaker1	“I was angry.
Speaker1	Next time, I’ll try to find a better way.”
Speaker1	“Just a few more questions, guys,” David said.
Speaker1	“They’re gonna need this room for the next session soon.”
Speaker1	“What’s the most important thing you’ve learned since you’ve been here?” one girl asked.
Speaker1	“And what do you hope will happen to the church?”
Speaker1	I had spent the week parsing Bible verses with David and Rabbi Yonah Bookstein, who ran the festival with his wife, Rachel, and I couldn’t help diving into the verse I had most fixated on.
Speaker1	“One of the most mind-blowing things is how they understand the verse that says, ‘Love thy neighbor.’” I quoted the verses.
Speaker1	Thou shalt not hate thy brother in thine heart: thou shalt in any wise rebuke thy neighbour, and not suffer sin upon him.
Speaker1	Thou shalt not avenge, nor bear any grudge against the children of thy people, but thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.
Speaker1	“At home,” I continued, “we always equated love with rebuke, because of that passage.
Speaker1	As long as we believed our words to be truthful, we were free to rebuke the rest of the world at any time, in any place, and in any way that we wanted.
Speaker1	We could be harsh, and crude, and insulting, and it didn’t matter, because everyone else was Hell-bound anyway.
Speaker1	Those verses justified almost everything we did—including picketing funerals.
Speaker1	But David told us about that passage from a Jewish perspective.”
Speaker1	“From our view,” David said, “a rebuke is supposed to happen privately, kindly, and with people you have reason to believe will hear you.
Speaker1	If you’re attacking someone you know won’t listen—if you’re trying to correct them harshly, in a way that will provoke them to anger instead of encouraging them to change their ways—then you’re the one who is committing a sin.”
Speaker1	“I feel so stupid saying this,” I said, “but we really believed that it was irrelevant how we spoke to people.
Speaker1	‘Gospel preaching is not hateful!’ we always said.
Speaker1	‘Truth equals love!’ But now it seems so painfully obvious: of course it matters how we talk to people.
Speaker1	Truth and love are not synonyms.
Speaker1	The New Testament even says it plainly.
Speaker1	Speak the truth in love.
Speaker1	The Apostle Paul said, To the weak became I as weak and that we should weep with them that weep.
Speaker1	I don’t know how we missed that for so long.”
Speaker1	“Your other question about what we hope will happen to the church…” Grace paused.
Speaker1	“We want them all to leave.
Speaker1	People have been speculating for a long time about what would happen if Gramps dies–”
Speaker1	“You mean when Gramps dies?” David asked.
Speaker1	“He doesn’t believe he’s going to die,” Grace said.
Speaker1	“He thinks Jesus will return while he’s still alive.
Speaker1	People think the church will fall apart if Gramps dies … but if the church ever did fall apart and our family still believed the church’s doctrines—that would be awful.
Speaker1	We’re not sure how the church could come to an end without destroying the lives of everyone inside.”
Speaker1	“We’re still hopeful, though,” I said.
Speaker1	“We think our best chance is that someone will be able to get through to the people in the church.
Speaker1	What we really hope is that we can find a way to do for our family what David helped do for me.”
Speaker1	Two days later, having been unofficially adopted by both David and the Bookstein family, I returned to Deadwood alone.
Speaker1	I loved the new members of our southern California family, but part of me was wounded that Grace had chosen to stay in Los Angeles with Rabbi Yonah and Rachel and the kids.
Speaker1	I remembered that Libby had felt the same way when I’d chosen to stay in Deadwood.
Speaker1	“I feel like you’re choosing strangers over family,” she had accused me during a phone call, her voice breaking.
Speaker1	Don’t you understand?
Speaker1	I’d thought.
Speaker1	It’s not a decision meant to hurt you.
Speaker1	I just can’t be there.
Speaker1	When it came to Grace, I wouldn’t keep repeating the pattern we’d learned at Westboro—the tendency to moralize every decision as good or evil, the wielding of guilt and the withholding of affection to control the people I loved.
Speaker1	Sometimes, a person just needed to do what was right for them.
Speaker1	I tried to focus on the good that might come of my sister’s absence.
Speaker1	Maybe it would lift some of the pressure off our relationship.
Speaker1	Maybe we needed a little space to grow on our own, rather than trying to live as a unit.
Speaker1	Because we shared a bank account and the car I’d bought a few years earlier, our sisterhood sometimes felt more like a marriage, and the confusion was a source of strife between us.
Speaker1	Sometimes it seemed that Grace wanted me to be a big sister, sometimes a substitute parent.
Speaker1	She resented needing me for anything and was desperate for independence, but she relied on me for practical skills she hadn’t yet developed.
Speaker1	My need to take care of and protect her was so strong that I was having a hard time distinguishing between us, always speaking in terms of “we” and “us” and “ours.” Sometimes it felt like we were the same person.
Speaker1	“No,” Laura said emphatically when I told her this, “the two of you are so different.” I was bewildered by this declaration, honestly believing the exact reverse.
Speaker1	“I think this will be good for both of you.”
Speaker1	And it was.
Speaker1	Even though I felt awkward and anxious without Grace by my side, even though I would never have chosen to be apart from her, I realized that it was nice to have some space to myself.
Speaker1	I started spending time with my coworkers at TDG—long conversations about politics and human nature with Jack, fierce games of volleyball with Brittany and Amanda and the boys.
Speaker1	I was heartened when a man claiming to be a member of Anonymous called the office to threaten me, and one of my coworkers responded by lambasting him, standing up for me and telling the man that I was a good person.
Speaker1	I also became closer with Dustin and Laura, who would remain two of my closest friends long after I left Deadwood, long after they left the Jehovah’s Witnesses and joined me in the wandering path of doubt and skepticism and confusion and wonder and awe at how different the world was than we had believed.
Speaker1	When we compared stories of our unraveling faith, I was struck by the similarities.
Speaker1	In the same way I had been perplexed by the arbitrariness of the different modesty standards among Westboro families—How could the standards of God differ from house to house?—Dustin had been confounded by the Witness prohibition on movies with an “R” rating.
Speaker1	In the United States, that meant The Matrix was forbidden—but when he saw the film on the shelf of a Witness in the U.K., an elder explained that the rating system in that country was different.
Speaker1	For both Dustin and me, one of the earliest sources of doubt had been incredibly trivial matters that highlighted internal inconsistency and a deeper issue—a dawning awareness of human perception coloring and altering apparently divine laws.
Speaker1	In the stories of others departing similar high-control groups, I would notice this pattern again and again: an “unshakable faith” first called into question by the group’s failure to live up to its own standards.
Speaker1	And then I finally—finally—met Chad.
Speaker1	He had declared he’d come to the play and then failed to show, and I had nearly decided that he was a lost cause.
Speaker1	That he didn’t really want to meet me.
Speaker1	That it was all just some sort of imaginary friendship for him.
Speaker1	That this whole thing really was an episode of Catfish.
Speaker1	Three times in as many months he had told me he’d be in Deadwood and would see me, and three times he had failed to appear.
Speaker1	I’d spent those months making excuses for his behavior, rationalizing and justifying his neglect: “What respectable person would want anything to do with someone with a past like mine?
Speaker1	Whatever the reason, a girl who’d tormented grieving families at funerals and liberally tossed around epithets like ‘fag’ isn’t the one to bring home to Mom.”
Speaker1	Still, I was wholly unable to grasp why he refused to just tell me that.
Speaker1	I must have seemed insane to him, expressing my undying love in one breath and begging him to please just let me off the hook in the next, to just admit that this wasn’t going anywhere so that I could move on with my miserable life.
Speaker1	I was in the throes of obsession and despair that I suppose is typical of an unrequited first love, so I certainly wasn’t going to act the part of the sane, rational, self-respecting one.
Speaker1	After the third misfire, though, I could not ignore what was painfully, devastatingly apparent: his dereliction was no accident.
Speaker1	MEGAN: Chad?
Speaker1	Tell me sometime.
Speaker1	I can be patient.
Speaker1	I just don’t want to chase something that doesn’t want to be caught.
Speaker1	I’m almost convinced that’s what I’m doing.
Speaker1	To my great amazement and relief, he finally materialized the weekend after the Jewlicious Festival.
Speaker1	I had been cut off from my family for more than four months by then, and had been slammed repeatedly into the outermost threshold of my capacity for heartbreak and rejection.
Speaker1	Just at the point when I thought I would lose my mind from hurt, shame, and rage—at myself, mostly, for having believed his sweet words when I knew in the smallest parts of myself that I didn’t deserve to have someone care about me like that, that I didn’t deserve any good thing in this life—Chad texted from a casino in town and said that I should come meet him there.
Speaker1	It was 10:30 P.M., and I was livid.
Speaker1	In the back of my mind was a niggling worry about what he’d think of me, whether he’d be disappointed, but I had no mental energy to process it.
Speaker1	Instead, my circuits were overloaded with humiliation and anger: we had obviously arrived at the portion of the program where the catfisher pretends to finally follow through with a meeting and then stands up his foolish victim for the last time.
Speaker1	I was incensed at the thought, and I absolutely was not going to take another moment of this sham if it turned out to be another evasion.
Speaker1	I had every intention of following through with the threat I issued in response to Chad’s invitation.
Speaker1	MEGAN: If I leave my comfy bed and come there and don’t see you, I’m so never talking to either one of us again!
Speaker1	I changed out of my pajamas and made my way through the crowds dressed for St. Patrick’s Day—it was March 16, the night Deadwood was having its holiday pub crawl.
Speaker1	The casino was packed with people alive with alcohol, roaring with laughter in outlandish green costumes, and I had no idea how to find him.
Speaker1	He must have been watching the door, because after a few moments, he stood up at one of the blackjack tables with a sheepish look, almost apologetic.
Speaker1	I recognized him instantly from across the room—too tall, too blond, and too like his photo to be anyone else—and my anger evaporated.
Speaker1	I slipped through the throng, following him to a less populated corner of the room where we sat down at adjacent slot machines and began to talk.
Speaker1	The chaos surrounding us dissolved as I watched him in the garish lights of the casino floor.
Speaker1	I couldn’t take in anything but him.
Speaker1	Some remote corner of my mind noted that his gray pullover and lean, muscular frame made him look like a college frat boy, but it was his face that held my gaze: the blue eyes, the half smile, the blond curls that fell over his forehead.
Speaker1	I noticed these things, but most of my attention was spent in a struggle to assimilate the reality of his existence.
Speaker1	That he was, in fact, corporeal.
Speaker1	He didn’t say it, but I surmised that he was still afraid of me—of our age difference, afraid I’d meet him just this once and then bail, afraid that I would reject him.
Speaker1	Preposterous.
Speaker1	For two hours we tried to feel each other out, both of us quiet and cautious, laughing and talking about everything except what we really wanted to.
Speaker1	Just like our days of Words With Friends chats, our conversation was entirely chaste, decorous—“appropriate,” as my family would say.
Speaker1	I did manage to ask for a hug at one point.
Speaker1	It was clear from his body language that he thought this a strange request—he kept glancing anxiously over his shoulder to the table where his friends were still playing blackjack—but he got up to oblige me.
Speaker1	He stood nearly a foot taller than me and he didn’t bend down, so my face was pressed awkwardly into his chest.
Speaker1	I didn’t mind.
Speaker1	I inhaled slowly and closed my eyes.
Speaker1	It wasn’t the embrace I’d dreamed about back in Topeka so many hopeless months before—the city was wrong, and the season, his hands weren’t in my hair and it was midnight instead of noontime—but it was a damn good start.
Speaker1	I said a simple goodbye, left him to his cards, and headed back out into the night.
Speaker1	The rest of the year felt like sprinting in slow motion, urgent and constant movement that made the hours pass like deep breaths.
Speaker1	The odometer hadn’t quite reached five thousand miles the day my Pontiac pulled out of its spot on the Phelps-Roper driveway for the last time, and by the time November 11 rolled around again, more than forty thousand miles of cornfields, mountains, Midwestern thunderstorms, and Canadian countryside had raced past my windows.
Speaker1	Grace rejoined me in Deadwood after five weeks in Los Angeles, only to leave again a few weeks later, our orbits converging and diverging as we tried to understand who we were and what it might mean to live a good life outside of Westboro’s paradigm.
Speaker1	Every tenuous connection we’d made to the world while at the church suddenly became a lifeline, pulling us along from place to place, and into communities of people we’d learned to despise—from Bible studies with Christians in icy Des Moines, to Yiddish classes and volunteer work at the Jewish Federation in Montreal; from walking a former Westboro member down the aisle at her wedding in Connecticut, to supporting my former Twitter enemy Chad Darnell at the screening of his new film at the Kansas City LGBT Film Festival.
Speaker1	Month after month, my sister and I continued to drift around the country, never spending more than a few days or a few weeks at a time in any one place.
Speaker1	We supported ourselves on the money we’d saved at Westboro, with Grace’s excess scholarship funds from her university, with an insurance settlement for damage done to my car by a wicked hailstorm in the Black Hills, and with part-time jobs we found—Grace working as an assistant at a daycare center, while I worked remotely for TDG and did freelance administrative work I found online.
Speaker1	But more than anything, the sustaining force behind this period of wandering was our family and friends, friends of friends, even friends of friends of friends, people who opened their homes to us and helped us learn to see the world from many perspectives.
Speaker1	In the midst of my travels and several weeks after our St. Patrick’s Day adventure in Deadwood, Chad called to ask me out on my first date ever.
Speaker1	We met for dinner in Omaha the following week, and caught an opening-weekend showing of—what else?—The Great Gatsby.
Speaker1	It was a cool evening and everything was foreign to me, each sensation making it difficult for me to find my breath: the warmth of his big hand as it enveloped mine; the drumbeat of my pulse when he wrapped his arm around my waist; the way my whole body seemed to melt at being kissed for the first time.
Speaker1	I knew I never wanted to say goodbye, but we did, and I cried after he left.
Speaker1	He went home to South Dakota, and I returned to California to visit the Booksteins.
Speaker1	Two weeks later, I drove twenty-two hours straight from Los Angeles to Deadwood to see him.
Speaker1	He made the six-hour drive to meet me that weekend, and we met up nearly every weekend of my first summer away from home.
Speaker1	We explored the wild of the Black Hills all season long, my elation tempered only by the knowledge that my parents would be dismayed by the path I had chosen.
Speaker1	Instead of becoming habituated to Chad’s visits, I found each one more improbable than the last.