Speaker1	I didn’t want to tell her these things, but getting these ideas out of my head—giving them form—was the only thing keeping me sane.
Speaker1	Grace refused to let me off the hook: How would we know any God besides the one of the Bible?
Speaker1	If “decency” is the standard, how could we say what violates it if there are no Scriptures?
Speaker1	Is homosexuality wrong?
Speaker1	And adultery?
Speaker1	And abortion?
Speaker1	Without the Bible, how do we know when we make mistakes?
Speaker1	What made you change on July 4?
Speaker1	All these questions you ask me, wondering how we know the God of the Bible is the right one—did they come from C.G.
Speaker1	?
Speaker1	I had never felt so ignorant, but I was glad she was forcing me to think on these questions.
Speaker1	I answered, trying to deduce principles of morality as best I could.
Speaker1	I knew that Grace was suspicious of C.G., that she hadn’t approved of the closeness she’d sensed between us the year before—but when she asked about him, I told her the truth: that he’d never said anything of the kind.
Speaker1	That he’d been shocked when I messaged him that day.
Speaker1	That it was reason that brought me here.
Speaker1	My sister was unconvinced.
Speaker1	Meanwhile, C.G.
Speaker1	had questions of his own.
Speaker1	Two weeks had passed since I first spoke to him of leaving, and on the news that day, a tragedy: twelve people had been murdered—a shooting at a movie theater in Aurora, Colorado.
Speaker1	One of the victims had been an active Twitter user named Jessica Redfield.
Speaker1	The words of her friends and colleagues were circulating on the platform, and like so many others, I found her profile and read.
Speaker1	It shook me to see the words of a woman who had been alive not twenty-four hours before, to know that she had no idea what was about to befall her.
Speaker1	Even more chilling was the fact that just the month before, she had escaped another shooting at a mall in Toronto: she’d gotten a strange feeling and walked out just seconds before someone opened fire in the food court.
Speaker1	My heart ached for her and her family.
Speaker1	MEGAN: I just starred a tweet about @JessicaRedfield.
Speaker1	Had you seen that?
Speaker1	Look at her timeline.
Speaker1	She had no warning.
Speaker1	Scary and sad.
Speaker1	C.G.
Speaker1	: I heard about her.
Speaker1	I will.
Speaker1	I still don’t know if I know you.
Speaker1	30 days ago, you’d have been saying “God sent the shooter” today.
Speaker1	Today: I just sense that you have empathy and that’s it.
Speaker1	Which?
Speaker1	MEGAN: The latter.
Speaker1	I just feel disconnected from all that.
Speaker1	It was kind of happening a little at a time (e.g., on issues like tragedies; I told you it didn’t make me happy).
Speaker1	As soon as I started to actually let myself second-guess it, it’s just drifted so far away …
Speaker1	I don’t know that I could get it back even if I really wanted to.
Speaker1	Grace and I had been close for years, but after those few weeks of avoidance, this period brought us physically closer than ever before.
Speaker1	When we weren’t arm in arm, we walked close enough to stumble over each other’s feet.
Speaker1	At pickets, we stood inches apart, holding two signs each in the outside hand—as if they were a buffer to keep anyone from penetrating the protective cocoon we were building around ourselves.
Speaker1	She had slept in my bed on occasion, but now it was almost every night.
Speaker1	Always trying to discern which way was up.
Speaker1	I even took to carrying her on my back, like I’d done when we were kids.
Speaker1	It was comforting to think that among all the casualties we were about to sustain, at least we would get to keep each other.
Speaker1	Neither our closeness, our sadness, nor our joy was acceptable to the elders.
Speaker1	My father got wind that Grace had sat in my lap at our hymn-singing one evening, and instructed us not to do it again.
Speaker1	He did the same when he found out she was sleeping in my bed.
Speaker1	When an uncle of ours caught us jumping on the trampoline one evening at dusk—a momentary release of pent-up anguish, frustration, confusion, and fear—he stared us down as he made his way from the church to his home across the yard.
Speaker1	Grace was “in trouble.” Everything she did was suspect—and the fact that I was comforting rather than ostracizing her made me suspect, too.
Speaker1	As much as I tried not to imagine the actual act of leaving, Grace seemed determined to make me face what it would mean.
Speaker1	She would text me from work, detailing all that we would lose if we walked away from the church.
Speaker1	What comfort would there be in a world without the prospect of eternal bliss alongside our loved ones?
Speaker1	How could we depend on mere humans for anything?
Speaker1	And in the event that we somehow managed to withstand the storms of life—death, illness, injury—and make it to old age, how meaningless would our lives have been?
Speaker1	If we missed all those years watching our little brothers grow up and our parents’ hair turn gray, what would we have to look forward to at the end of our lives?
Speaker1	“I weep,” she wrote.
Speaker1	Running errands for my mother, I pulled my car into the nearest parking lot and wept, too.
Speaker1	We decided to stay.
Speaker1	Ultimately, Grace and I could entertain the possibility of leaving for only a few weeks before it became too much.
Speaker1	We were each inhabiting two minds: the one that was trying to make things work within Westboro’s framework, and the one that was preparing for the worst.
Speaker1	It made me question my sanity, unsure of every thought that crossed my mind.
Speaker1	A double minded man is unstable in all his ways.
Speaker1	Grace pointed out that although leaving was unthinkable, despair awaited us no matter which option we chose.
Speaker1	“How can we be happy?” she asked me.
Speaker1	MEGAN: For now, we can try to avoid situations where those problems come up.
Speaker1	Keep a low profile.
Speaker1	Stay close to home.
Speaker1	That kind of thing.
Speaker1	And for the future … we don’t know for sure what’s going to happen.
Speaker1	I have a feeling it’s going to get worse re: Steve, et al, but maybe it won’t.
Speaker1	We could deal with that when we come to it.
Speaker1	We can also do what you said—organize our rooms/things.
Speaker1	Save money.
Speaker1	Make and keep memories.
Speaker1	All those things are good no matter if we left or stayed.
Speaker1	We’re just going to keep trying.
Speaker1	GRACE: Thank you.
Speaker1	MEGAN: I love you, G. I’m sorry I put this burden on you.
Speaker1	GRACE: I love you, double.
Speaker1	No apology necessary.
Speaker1	MEGAN: Had you thought about it at all—even as a vague, remote possibility—before we talked in my room that day?
Speaker1	GRACE: Not really.
Speaker1	Maybe because I thought if I ever did, I’d be alone.
Speaker1	MEGAN: Me, too.
Speaker1	“If we go, we’ll go together.”
Speaker1	If something happens with me and they make me go, I would understand if you wanted to stay.
Speaker1	GRACE: Quidem.
Speaker1	Together.
Speaker1	This was the plan we came up with: Stay.
Speaker1	Attempt to convince the rest of the church to hear our objections.
Speaker1	Pray for the best.
Speaker1	And only if our best efforts failed would we again consider leaving.
Speaker1	I also had to stop pursuing my questions about the Bible and where it stood on the spectrum of truth.
Speaker1	Permanently dethroning the Scriptures I had so revered was inconceivable.
Speaker1	They contained too much good to come down definitively against them, and Hell was a looming possibility that felt far too real.
Speaker1	Know thou the God of thy father, and serve him with a perfect heart and with a willing mind: for the Lord searcheth all hearts, and understandeth all the imaginations of the thoughts: if thou seek him, he will be found of thee; but if thou forsake him, he will cast thee off for ever.
Speaker1	Not long after we made our decision, C.G.
Speaker1	disappeared without warning.
Speaker1	I hadn’t told him we were planning to stay, and he gave no explanation for his sudden withdrawal.
Speaker1	He simply stopped answering my messages.
Speaker1	My sister did not delight to see my despair compounded, but I knew she was glad it was over.
Speaker1	She wanted me to be committed to our life at Westboro, and she perceived that I would be distracted so long as I had even a shadow of hope about C.G.
Speaker1	Grace’s intuition was correct, but the ache in my chest was as deep as it had been when he and I had said goodbye the year before—and that told me all I needed to know.
Speaker1	In spite of my hurt and anger at his sudden dismissal, I understood that the end result for me—that I would be forced to come to grips with the church and my beliefs without outside influence—was the best possible outcome.
Speaker1	My decision had to be untainted.
Speaker1	If we did eventually leave, it could only be because it was the right choice to make—because the church had replaced the Scriptures with the word of these fallible men—and not because I wanted something to which I wasn’t entitled.
Speaker1	But every man is tempted, when he is drawn away of his own lust, and enticed.
Speaker1	Do not err, my beloved brethren.
Speaker1	And—I thought bitterly—whatever else C.G.
Speaker1	intended, he was teaching me a valuable lesson: on the outside, Grace and I could count on no one but ourselves.
Speaker1	Having established our intention to stay, Grace and I found ourselves right back where we began: in an intolerable situation that had to be confronted.
Speaker1	But how?
Speaker1	We decided to start slowly at first.
Speaker1	Rather, we decided that I would start slowly.
Speaker1	My sister was still the subject of ongoing church discipline, and like our mother, had no space at all to object.
Speaker1	No matter how legitimate the complaint, she would be seen as recalcitrant and almost certainly excluded from the church without delay.
Speaker1	I had only marginally more leeway, and I was well on my way to losing even that.
Speaker1	Grace and I had refrained from using Twitter almost entirely since July 4, though she had a good excuse: as part of her punishment, the elders had forbidden her from doing so.
Speaker1	But given my generally prolific use of the platform, my sudden lack of Twitter activity—combined with an inability to hide my heavy heart—had almost immediately become cause for worry.
Speaker1	I began to receive concerned text messages, phone calls, and visits from other church members, with Steve at the head of the pack.
Speaker1	He called me up one day in late July.
Speaker1	I was out at the noontime pickets with two of my cousins when my phone rang—and though I wanted badly to decline the call, I picked up.
Speaker1	Delaying the discussion would only make things worse.
Speaker1	I could never stay still when stressed, so as soon as I answered, “Hello, Steve?,” I began dragging myself up and down the sidewalk in the heavy humidity, pacing in front of a church we’d protested every single day since I was about six.
Speaker1	Steve said I seemed down.
Speaker1	No shit, I thought, but held my tongue.
Speaker1	He said he was worried because I didn’t seem as unguarded as I’d always been.
Speaker1	I didn’t attempt to deny it, but I focused on the safer sources of my despondency: the difficulty of watching my mother go through this long period of transition and general fatigue from all the work on my plate.
Speaker1	“You didn’t mention Grace,” Steve said flatly.
Speaker1	Suspicious.
Speaker1	I mumbled for a moment, unsure of how to proceed except to say that I was weary and wary, and then he jumped in again.
Speaker1	“It’s not a doctrinal thing, is it?” He was incredulous at the thought, but before he could make me answer, he launched into a diatribe about the importance of regularly engaging other members of the church.
Speaker1	I wanted to shoot back that he and the other elders had made that impossible.
Speaker1	That they had created such a sense of fear within the body that there was no way to speak openly about any objection to their actions.
Speaker1	An Orwellian level of control over our every word, our every movement.
Speaker1	But I kept quiet.
Speaker1	When he finished, I thanked him kindly, hung up the phone, and made a decision.
Speaker1	I had already suspected that doctrinal errors would be the most difficult to change, because they were seen as coming directly from the Word of God: “Death Penalty for Fags,” “Fags Can’t Repent,” “Pray for More Dead Soldiers,” “Pray for More Dead Kids.” What if I focused instead on the application of doctrine?
Speaker1	Not theology.
Speaker1	Not major foundational principles or anything that required extensive exegesis.
Speaker1	Just kindness within the church—the lack of which seemed to me the clearest and the simplest example that Westboro had veered far off track.
Speaker1	This was the place to start.
Speaker1	Grace and I also decided that our mother seemed the safest person to approach first.
Speaker1	Although she, too, had been deprived of her voice in church matters, she was the one who had helped convince our father to hear us out about the Photoshopping incidents.
Speaker1	I had to believe that she knew her treatment to be unscriptural, no matter how often the elders made her profess otherwise.
Speaker1	I was cautious at first, asking more questions about the details of the incidents that continued to occur almost daily, just interminable pettiness.
Speaker1	I knew she was trying to hide her sorrow from me and my siblings, but she was no more successful than I was—especially since I was paying closer attention than ever.
Speaker1	What did my mother really think?
Speaker1	As the weeks passed, I expanded the scope of these discussions to include the treatment of Justin and Lindsey, as well.
Speaker1	And then Grace.
Speaker1	Even the cousin who had been voted out a few months earlier.
Speaker1	I started with my mother, and then continued with my Gran, both of whom were sympathetic.
Speaker1	Neither of them disagreed with my analysis and both understood my despair—but whereas Gran would shake her head and agree that things looked very bad indeed, my mom would mostly listen.
Speaker1	The rest of the church—including her own husband—presented a united front as to my mother’s grave sins.
Speaker1	They made her believe that if she felt any offense or sense of unfairness with respect to their treatment of her, then it was completely a result of her pride, not because there was anything unjustified about their cruelty.
Speaker1	They ascribed ill motives to many of her actions—even positive actions—and then they retaliated against her on that basis.
Speaker1	And if my mother tried to dispute their analysis, there would be even more trouble.
Speaker1	As I came to appreciate these dynamics, my outrage increased and I grew bolder.
Speaker1	They were making her believe that she was literally insane.
Speaker1	That is—as I would later learn—they were “gaslighting” her.
Speaker1	I became the only person in her life willing to confirm, directly and unequivocally, that the accusations against her were unwarranted, off base, and often utterly deranged.
Speaker1	Although my mom avoided saying so directly, I eventually came to believe that she and I were on the same page about the unscriptural nature of so many of the actions and decisions implemented by the elders.
Speaker1	We would talk, and then we would pray together that the Lord would fix everything.
Speaker1	The only difference between us, I realized, was that she had no doubt that God was with Westboro.
Speaker1	It never seemed to occur to my mother that all of this misconduct might be evidence that we were wrong—that there was something rotten at the core of our beliefs.
Speaker1	With my brother Sam, I presented my disputes as hypotheticals or general curiosities.
Speaker1	I led with few specifics, lest he end the conversation and send me back to our dad—but he sensed there was more to my questions than I was letting on and pressed me to come out with it.
Speaker1	Standing outside a Topeka church during our Sunday morning pickets, I nearly broke down in tears of desperate frustration as I spoke of the cousin who’d been kicked out.
Speaker1	I made my case, citing verse after verse that showed how we had done her wrong.
Speaker1	I tried and failed to be calm, and he erupted in response, justifying it all: the church had made a decision, and God was with us, and that was that.
Speaker1	He was angry, but he also seemed genuinely perplexed that I had a problem with what had been done.
Speaker1	I knew I was getting into dangerous territory and backed off again.
Speaker1	At first, I steered clear of mentioning anything to Bekah, because I was afraid of what she would do.
Speaker1	With every good intention, she would surely have turned me over to the elders for what I now saw as “re-education,” putting me solidly on their radar as a troublemaker.
Speaker1	But if Grace and I decided to leave, I knew that I would then regret it forever if I didn’t try to talk to Bekah about what was happening.
Speaker1	Driving around Topeka with her, running errands after church, I poured my heart out.
Speaker1	I was cautious at first, restrained, describing everything as clinically as possible, the whole litany of misconduct going all the way back to the Photoshopping—but the longer I spoke, the more desperate I became.
Speaker1	As I parked the car in the Office Max parking lot, my words came faster and faster, rising to a fevered pitch until I was sobbing hysterically.
Speaker1	She reached over to hug me as I finished my jeremiad.
Speaker1	“… and I just don’t have any hope that it’ll ever be fixed!” She started crying then, too, and we stretched across the front seat in an awkward embrace.
Speaker1	I knew I was scaring her, but I had to lay it all on the line.
Speaker1	“I’m so sorry,” I whispered.
Speaker1	“It’s okay,” she said, weeping.
Speaker1	“It’s okay if you break my heart.” I had said all I could say.
Speaker1	She walked into the store while I tried to compose myself, and on our drive back to the house, her focus was on encouraging me to speak to the elders.
Speaker1	If I could just tell them these things, surely there would be a good answer.
Speaker1	I told her I would keep trying, and she seemed relieved—not particularly worried about the troublesome case I had made against the elders themselves.
Speaker1	So confident that all was well in the Lord’s church.
Speaker1	Trust and obey was second nature.
Speaker1	Finally, after several weeks, I went to my father.
Speaker1	Again, I tried to be calm and reasonable.
Speaker1	I limited myself to subtle questions and gentle pushback—possible only thanks to Herculean efforts to swallow the panic rising in my chest—but at every turn, I was shut down.
Speaker1	As day after day, week after week passed with no improvement and no obvious way forward, I began to despair again.
Speaker1	As September rolled in, my mantra changed.
Speaker1	Gone were the days of Grace … I don’t think I can do this forever.
Speaker1	“Grace.
Speaker1	I can’t do this forever.”
Speaker1	We sat together in Grace’s bedroom, she at the foot of her bed and me on the floor staring up at her.
Speaker1	This room still felt very much like a child’s—white curtains with little blue stars printed all over them, her walls and ceiling painted in bright, primary colors.
Speaker1	It had been such a happy time when we’d repainted it two years before.
Speaker1	All of the siblings had been obsessed with a bizarre YouTube cartoon called Charlie the Unicorn, and in one corner of the room, I’d used a tiny brush to paint cheery polka dots and quotes from the show: “It’s a land of sweets, and joy, and … joyness.” It hit me again how very young she was.
Speaker1	I couldn’t ask her to leave.
Speaker1	I wouldn’t pressure her.
Speaker1	But I also couldn’t keep walking this fine line.
Speaker1	How long would I be able to avoid media and funeral pickets without detection?
Speaker1	How long until someone handed me a sign I believed unscriptural?
Speaker1	How long could I continue to choose my words ever so carefully—like some dishonest politician?
Speaker1	I largely escaped explicit lies, but I grew ever more uneasy as I faced the fact that I was deceiving everyone both within the church and without.
Speaker1	I might be limiting my own behavior, but with my presence and assistance, I was endorsing the rest of Westboro’s behavior, too.
Speaker1	The church had always been all or nothing—in or out—and this was no-man’s-land.
Speaker1	I could not survive here.
Speaker1	Grace and I eventually decided that unless something major changed, and soon, we would have to leave.
Speaker1	We would begin to prepare in earnest, and in the meantime I would also take greater risks in raising these objections with others.
Speaker1	The closer we came to walking out the door, the less I had to lose by sticking my neck out to petition the others.
Speaker1	And what if Grace somehow managed to get kicked out before we could actually leave?
Speaker1	We started a new game of Words With Friends, and Grace changed her username so that it was unidentifiable.
Speaker1	No matter what happened, we could always communicate privately there.
Speaker1	As soon as the decision was made, my first course of action became immediately clear: apologize to Justin and Lindsey.
Speaker1	Mindful that I was now in the territory of direct rebellion against my father’s instructions, I drafted a text message to Justin explaining why we had suddenly disappeared from his and Lindsey’s life.
Speaker1	Even as fearful as I was, I knew that reaching out to our erstwhile friends was the right thing to do.
Speaker1	I should have done it months ago.
Speaker1	That I had to rebel in order to apologize struck me as hopelessly corrupt.
Speaker1	I thought my heart would stop while waiting for Justin to respond.
Speaker1	Again, the prospect of imminent doom hung over my head—whether destruction from God or discovery by my family—and I tried to still my shaking hands as I unloaded the dishwasher.
Speaker1	Perhaps Justin had learned his lesson last time, and was already turning me in.
Speaker1	Perhaps the elders were launching an investigation this very second.
Speaker1	My fear got the better of me, and I texted again to beg for a response—ironic, considering that I had left them hanging for over three months.
Speaker1	When Justin finally returned my text, it was everything I had been trying to tell my parents for months: That he and Lindsey had had no idea why they were being treated this way.
Speaker1	That the last time he had tried to reconcile, it had gone horribly awry.
Speaker1	That it had been painful to be left in the dark, “tossed off and forgotten,” and that his wife was angry about the way the church had managed things.
Speaker1	Justin was afraid of getting into trouble for this text exchange, too, and promised not to tell anyone but Lindsey.
Speaker1	At least we had that assurance.
Speaker1	But from what Justin said, Lindsey seemed done with the drama.
Speaker1	She saw no hope for change.
Speaker1	Justin told me that the elders had even forbidden sewing lessons with some of the younger girls that Lindsey had planned with their parents.
Speaker1	She and Justin had planned a “double date” with another young couple, and that, too, had been disallowed.
Speaker1	I was baffled.
Speaker1	Having meals together was a regular part of our fellowship, and had been for as long as I had been alive.