Speaker1	“Your dad is, too,” Jen said, “but he needs to get his house in order.”
Speaker1	All of the older, married men.
Speaker1	I felt sure that my father could not have been involved in this decision, but I was aghast at the rest of them—both the ones who had orchestrated it and those who had acquiesced.
Speaker1	It occurred to me that over the course of just a few days, these men had managed to overturn the democratic system, gleaned from Scripture, that had ruled Westboro all my life.
Speaker1	Only then did I understand that this had been the ultimate purpose of that email.
Speaker1	No doubt they believed they were assuming their rightful place at the head of the church, and Sam and Steve must have seen that my mother had been the only member of the church with enough influence to take a stand against such a hostile takeover, so there were no two ways about it: if these men were going to supplant the church’s long-standing decision-making practices, she had to be neutered.
Speaker1	The new hierarchy they had instituted made it instantly apparent where the rest of us now stood.
Speaker1	They hadn’t even bothered to let us know.
Speaker1	My mother had always laughed at the remarkable resemblance between her sense of humor and Grace’s.
Speaker1	Whereas Bekah and I tended to view life through rose-colored lenses, wanting our stories tied up with big red bows and happily-ever-afters, the thought patterns shared by Grace and our mother were often morbid, endlessly playful, and frequently resulted in a group of siblings laughing ourselves to tears.
Speaker1	Grace was forever plotting, her mind spinning tales for us at every moment.
Speaker1	One day I returned to my desk and found money she owed me for a pair of jeans she’d bought on my credit card.
Speaker1	Attached was a note, typical of her mischievous machinations, written as if to a loan shark with a plea not to “hurt my family.”
Speaker1	Sisterhood had not always been so agreeable to me.
Speaker1	I could never identify precisely when it happened, but somewhere along the line, my eight younger siblings had—mercifully—ceased devoting their every waking hour to fighting and fits.
Speaker1	I had always felt protective of these adorable nuisances, but now they had grown into clever and creative human beings whose minds I’d want to know even in the absence of our genetic connection.
Speaker1	I’d spent my early years seizing upon every opportunity to spend time away from them, desperate to be free of responsibility for them and to be a Big Kid.
Speaker1	Now we sought each other out whenever we had free time.
Speaker1	We’d walk to the bakery for cake pops and frosting shots while Noah pontificated on Captain Underpants and The Hunger Games.
Speaker1	We made time for family movie night most weekends, parsing scenes from films like Inception and Never Let Me Go for weeks afterward.
Speaker1	On more than one occasion, I reached my arms out to my sides to stretch only to have Luke mistake it as an invitation for a hug.
Speaker1	The nine of us were easily a self-sufficient picketing team, a formidable crew of laborers, people who could work together mostly drama-free to get things done, with good-natured teasing and banter all along the way.
Speaker1	Sunday afternoons would see us hiking together with our parents along the trails by the Kansas Governor’s Mansion, chatting and laughing and tripping over each other in the waning sun, throwing ourselves onto the train tracks and feigning looks of abject terror for an impromptu photo shoot.
Speaker1	Our parents would hold hands, contentedly watching over the whole brood of us and laughing at our shenanigans.
Speaker1	The lessons that brought us to this place hadn’t come easily, but they were among my most treasured.
Speaker1	Being part of a family this size—especially with our imaginative and ever-attentive parents at the helm—had helped to teach us humility and patience.
Speaker1	We had each come into the world with a strong personality and an outsize sense of justice, but as we grew, we learned to pick our battles, not to throw down at the slightest provocation.
Speaker1	We learned to yield to each other.
Speaker1	But the wisdom that is from above is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, and easy to be intreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without partiality, and without hypocrisy.
Speaker1	In the months that followed the installation of the self-appointed elders, I dedicated myself to employing these lessons in the face of escalating confusion and frustration.
Speaker1	The elders issued new edicts on an ad hoc basis, and always via direct, in-person communication; gone were the days of church-wide emails and meetings where important matters were hashed out for all members to hear and weigh in on.
Speaker1	Instead, members would learn of decisions from an assigned elder: one’s husband, if married, or father, if not.
Speaker1	For the few members who had neither husband nor father as a church elder, an elder was appointed to disseminate information to them.
Speaker1	Questions and concerns, once freely discussed with all other church members, were now confined to our assigned elder or parents only.
Speaker1	My brother Sam had been my friend and counselor for many years, but when I asked him about a new decision in the early stages of this process, he shut me down: “You need to talk to Dad about that.
Speaker1	He’s the one you should be addressing such things with.” Joy, contentedness, submission—these were the only acceptable communications among the church body as a whole.
Speaker1	Not even Gramps was an appropriate audience for questions or doubts, as he was kept only minimally aware of all the maneuverings of the elders and the day-to-day happenings of the church.
Speaker1	This had already been a trend for some time.
Speaker1	My grandfather was getting older, and my family had taken an example from the book of Exodus, when Jethro, the father-in-law of Moses, saw that the job of leading the Israelites had become too much for Moses to do alone.
Speaker1	Thou wilt surely wear away, both thou, and this people that is with thee: for this thing is too heavy for thee; thou art not able to perform it thyself alone.
Speaker1	Jethro proposed that a system of lesser judges be instituted beneath Moses, and it shall be, that every great matter they shall bring unto thee, but every small matter they shall judge: so shall it be easier for thyself, and they shall bear the burden with thee.
Speaker1	The new elders seemed to see themselves in this manner, relieving my grandfather of the burden of leading the church.
Speaker1	To go over their heads and seek aid or comfort or understanding from our pastor directly—to call the elders’ judgment into question in any way—was not allowed.
Speaker1	Even as the cruelty toward my mother continued and increased for months on end, and even though she and Gramps were close, she dared not be open with him about what was happening to her.
Speaker1	If she had, her exclusion from the church would have been all but certain.
Speaker1	I struggled to conform to our new paradigm, and I struggled to understand and articulate why I was struggling.
Speaker1	Theoretically, it was possible to implement a change like this in a biblical way.
Speaker1	There were plenty of verses in the New Testament about elders, and I realized for the first time that at least some of them were referring to a specific office in the church—not just to “older people.” And when they had ordained them elders in every church, they commended them to the Lord.
Speaker1	Let the elders that rule well be counted worthy of double honour.
Speaker1	But unlike in that passage, we hadn’t ordained these elders; they had ordained themselves—a fact that would have been easier to accept if I hadn’t felt conflicted about nearly every decision they issued.
Speaker1	One of the first came just before the Royal Wedding, the marriage of Prince William to Kate Middleton.
Speaker1	Per our usual practice, the church issued a news release and announced on Twitter that we would protest the affair: “Wedding vows mean nothing to these royal mutts!” We had no intention of actually traveling to London—not least because the United Kingdom had banned church members from entering the country—but even the announcement of a protest was enough to generate significant media coverage.
Speaker1	We were engaging in what we called “virtual picketing”: protesting a faraway event in a local space, and reaching the target audience by publishing photos and messages on the Internet and through the media.
Speaker1	There was nothing inherently dishonest about this tactic—injustice in one city often inspires public demonstrations in others—except, of course, that our intent was to deceive.
Speaker1	We had employed this strategy before, choosing words that were technically true, but designed to leave an impression that was not: that we were actually present outside the event.
Speaker1	I’d thought this was funny when I was younger, viewing it as a prank or a trick, rather than a lie.
Speaker1	The behavior seemed questionable to me now, but all doubt left my mind as soon as I saw my cousin Jael abandoning the “technically true” for outright lies: she was posting tweets about being on a plane to London.
Speaker1	My heart sank when I received a group text from Steve instructing everyone with a Twitter profile to republish a post from an account he had just created: @UGNewsWire.
Speaker1	The account purported to be an “Int’l News Service,” complete with a fake logo to make it appear as if it were a legitimate media outlet.
Speaker1	Its posts read:
Speaker1	WBC members (of ‘God Hates Fags’ infamy) picket outside Westminster Abbey day before #RoyalWedding
Speaker1	Westboro Baptist protesters outside Westminster Abbey - singing songs & chanting ‘God Hates the UK’
Speaker1	The infamous Westboro Baptist Church is on the ground in the UK - protesting the Royal Wedding:
Speaker1	Each of the posts included an image of Westminster Abbey that had been digitally altered to include picketers with signs.
Speaker1	I saw that Steve had sent them to the BBC, the Associated Press, USA Today, and other news organizations.
Speaker1	I was mortified.
Speaker1	These lies were idiotic, not only violating the Scriptures but offering the hordes of people who hated us a legitimate reason to impugn the integrity of the church.
Speaker1	It undermined our claim to being messengers of God, and it was the picture of a verse my mother quoted often: Give none occasion to the adversary to speak reproachfully.
Speaker1	I had several thousand followers on Twitter, and though I angered them on a regular basis, I had a growing sense of community with the people I encountered there.
Speaker1	I felt like I owed them the truth, and I didn’t want to be attacked for being dishonest.
Speaker1	And on top of everything else, I didn’t want them to think I was the type of person who would tell ridiculous lies for the sake of publicity.
Speaker1	In a pique, Grace found me at my desk not long after Steve’s message came through: “Did you see Steve’s text?
Speaker1	!”
Speaker1	“Yeah,” I sighed.
Speaker1	“Yikes.” Grace and I talked it through and were in agreement that the whole situation was petty, wrong, and embarrassing.
Speaker1	We also knew that we would hear from Steve if we didn’t retweet him, and that we couldn’t decline his order without support from our parents.
Speaker1	If we refused to obey—even in the matter of a simple retweet—there would be trouble.
Speaker1	I briefly considered pretending to have missed Steve’s message, but that also would’ve been a lie, and it wouldn’t have worked, anyway: I had at least a few thousand more Twitter followers than all other church members, and he would certainly check my account to see if I’d done his bidding.
Speaker1	As if on cue, a follow-up text from Steve popped up on my screen.
Speaker1	I went in search of my mother and asked if we had to follow Steve’s instruction, explaining the objection that Grace and I shared.
Speaker1	This was just a week after my mother had sent her apology email to the church, and though she agreed with us, she had no standing to question or correct another church member on any matter—especially an elder—no matter how egregious.
Speaker1	She contacted my father at work, and returned later to report that we just needed to do what Steve had directed.
Speaker1	I picked up my phone and tapped the “retweet” button feeling utterly disgusted with Steve, with myself, and with the state of the church.
Speaker1	What was the matter with these elders?
Speaker1	Our integrity, our fidelity to the Scriptures—these were our foundation and our only defense against the accusations that the world was forever hurling in our direction.
Speaker1	Our signs were plastered with the wrath of God, but here we were, hypocritically ignoring one of the clearest declarations of God’s hatred in the Scriptures:
Speaker1	These six things doth the Lord hate: yea, seven are an abomination unto him: A proud look, a lying tongue, and hands that shed innocent blood, An heart that deviseth wicked imaginations, feet that be swift in running to mischief, A false witness that speaketh lies, and he that soweth discord among brethren.
Speaker1	Not just one but two of these seven abominations addressed lying.
Speaker1	A lying tongue.
Speaker1	A false witness that speaketh lies.
Speaker1	Just as I’d known they would, Twitter users quickly discovered the truth and began to call us out for the lies and manipulated photos.
Speaker1	They quoted Bible verses to me, the same ones I had quoted to my mother.
Speaker1	Ashamed and angry, I repeated the party line about “virtual picketing” and Steve’s ridiculous claim that the fake picket was never meant to be taken literally—that the photos were so poorly Photoshopped that no one could possibly have been taken in by them—but this, too, was demonstrably false.
Speaker1	When someone on Twitter pointed out to @UGNewsWire that Westboro members were banned from the U.K., Steve had tweeted back, “it was reported that the ban was lifted, but authorities can’t confirm.” Of course he meant to deceive people, I thought, he just did a shitty job.
Speaker1	Lying on my bed that night, Grace wasn’t spinning her absurd tales, and I wasn’t twisting her hair into French braids the way I’d done since she was a little girl.
Speaker1	It felt foolish to be worked up over something as small as a retweet.
Speaker1	Was our father right when he accused us of carping and self-righteousness?
Speaker1	He had reminded us that we knew these people in the church, that they were kind and thoughtful and trying to do right by the Lord.
Speaker1	They were working hard to preach to this God-forsaken world, and the two of us were sitting on the sidelines looking down our noses and sniping at them.
Speaker1	What was our problem?
Speaker1	Grace and I stared at the ceiling for a time, talking quietly until we came to the answer:
Speaker1	For the first time, we had been told to do something unscriptural by someone in a position of authority.
Speaker1	For the first time, we had no way to make our objections heard by the church.
Speaker1	And as always, we had no choice but to submit.
Speaker1	By July, three months after the initial disciplinary email, visible signs of the elders’ influence were multiplying.
Speaker1	A new, stricter modesty standard for women and girls had come first, implemented within days of the elder takeover.
Speaker1	Before that, the general rule had been to cover the “4 B’s”—“breasts, back, butt, and belly,” my mother recited—but its enforcement had never been draconian.
Speaker1	Now, showing any hint of skin in these areas—as, when reaching into the truck bed to grab a picket sign, a girl’s shirt rose and briefly exposed an inch of her stomach—was cause for censure.
Speaker1	Legs, too, had become a problem.
Speaker1	My parents sent my sisters and me to the mall in search of longer shorts, and we found several pairs that reached below mid-thigh.
Speaker1	Our father approved, but he had been given to understand that his judgment was suspect.
Speaker1	The process became even more demeaning when he sent me down to model the new shorts for my eldest brother.
Speaker1	I was twenty-five.
Speaker1	Sam was thirty-two.
Speaker1	He did not approve.
Speaker1	Modesty required high-necked blouses, dresses or pants that covered our legs down to our knees, and covered feet—no sandals—during the Sunday church service.
Speaker1	My mother’s disappearance from the media was another outward indication of the shift.
Speaker1	She had represented the church in newspapers and radio interviews the world over on an almost-daily basis, but now Steve had taken charge.
Speaker1	I was humiliated on her behalf as I watched her awkwardly turn away from a swarm of media that had surrounded us at a protest in Ohio.
Speaker1	They were clamoring for interviews, baffled and trying to understand our message—but preaching the Gospel was clearly less important to the elders than bringing my mother to heel.
Speaker1	Because she had been stripped of most of her other church-related duties, as well, the Phelps-Roper home grew eerily quiet as the constant flow of reporters, cousins, and other church members ebbed to a trickle.
Speaker1	As sudden and jarring as these changes were, there is an image that stands out in my memory as most clearly signaling the distress of this transition period: a close-up of my littlest sister’s fingers.
Speaker1	Grace and I paid close attention to the elders’ decisions, and the more we saw, the more troubled we became.
Speaker1	I was practiced at justifying Westboro’s doctrines, but the cracks forming in our fortress of logic and Scripture were becoming ever more difficult to ignore.
Speaker1	Why would we be punished for unintentionally flashing an inch of skin on our back or belly, while our brothers were permitted to swim shirtless, with all of theirs on full display?
Speaker1	Why were girls in other Westboro families subject to more lenient rules of modesty?
Speaker1	How could the standards of God differ from house to house?
Speaker1	Let us walk by the same rule, let us mind the same thing.
Speaker1	Sam dismissed our objections, seeming to believe that they originated from a desire to dress like sluts.
Speaker1	Grace and I knew better.
Speaker1	That the problem went far deeper: hypocrisy, and the dawning realization that the rules we had been taught—the divine rules of a sovereign God—were being systematically replaced by the caprices of fallible men.
Speaker1	Church members had always denied that we were “interpreting” the Bible, insisting that we were only reading and obeying what was plainly written in the Scriptures.
Speaker1	But once I was excluded from the discussions, it soon became obvious that interpretation was inescapable—that it was happening daily, hourly, and always in ways that protected and expanded the authority of these eight elders.
Speaker1	Holding signs together at the pickets, sitting at our desks at home, lying side by side on my bed, Grace and I floundered, trying to make sense of it all and coming up empty.
Speaker1	And all the while, she picked.
Speaker1	The bits of skin around her fingernails were tiny at first, but she picked at them for weeks, tearing them off again and again until all of her fingers were scabbed and bleeding.
Speaker1	“How did it go today?” Grace would ask in resignation when she returned home from school.
Speaker1	I’d describe watching our mother stare unmoving at her ringing cell phone again, and then she’d answer it quietly, disappearing to the far corners of our empty house to have another conversation with my dad.
Speaker1	Always more trouble, though she was trying to keep it from me.
Speaker1	I’d tiptoe after her to eavesdrop on her side of the conversation—a habit I’d picked up from Sam growing up—to learn the source of the conflict.
Speaker1	My mother was defensive, disbelieving the complaints my father was receiving: an aunt who disapproved of my mother’s tone, another vaguely unsatisfied that her mannerisms demonstrated sufficient repentance.
Speaker1	It was as if they were actively looking for reasons to be offended.
Speaker1	Despair was creeping toward the deepest parts of me, but I fought to keep it at bay and to comfort my sister.
Speaker1	As I relayed the day’s events to Grace, she would pick.
Speaker1	Pick.
Speaker1	Pick.
Speaker1	My reassurances about the necessity of submission—our own and our mother’s—began to sound hollow even to my own ears, and I could never say enough without resorting to lies.
Speaker1	Instead, I bought her a box of hot-pink Hello Kitty Band-Aids and covered the tips of all ten of her mangled fingers.
Speaker1	“The Megan Solution,” she called it.