Speaker1	Chapter eight.
Speaker1	Strangers and Pilgrims
Speaker1	We’d been on the road for a few hours by the time I realized I was white-knuckling the steering wheel.
Speaker1	There weren’t many cars at that early hour, but the image would have seemed comical to anyone passing me driving north on I-29.
Speaker1	Leaning forward with my face hovering just behind the dash, whole body clenched, I looked like the stereotypical grandmother with poor vision trying to navigate during rush hour.
Speaker1	Had my sister not been sleeping in the passenger seat, she surely would have made fun.
Speaker1	I unclenched my fists and tried to relax in my seat—only to realize a few minutes later that in the absence of conscious effort, my body had resumed its original position.
Speaker1	I gave up.
Speaker1	It was mid-December, and Grace and I were more than ready to get out of Kansas.
Speaker1	Just over a month had passed since I’d last seen my parents, and confusion had reigned in the interim.
Speaker1	After so many years of a life micromanaged by my mother, I now felt paralyzed each time I had to render an opinion about what steps to take next—as if decision-making were a muscle that had long since atrophied from disuse.
Speaker1	At home, everything I did, everywhere I went, how long I’d be gone, everything had been pre-approved, double-checked, and tightly controlled.
Speaker1	The multiplicity of rules was sometimes cause for frustration, but it was also a source of great confidence: I’d known what was required of me.
Speaker1	I’d known who I was, and where I fit into the world.
Speaker1	What did it mean to be the good girl in a world with no rules?
Speaker1	I was unmoored.
Speaker1	Outside of Westboro’s rigid system, fear and uncertainty now consumed me, a physical weight that I felt from the first morning I awoke in my cousin Libby’s house and every day thereafter: a boulder sitting on my chest, crushing my lungs, blocking any attempt to see around it.
Speaker1	I couldn’t breathe.
Speaker1	I couldn’t move.
Speaker1	I was terrified of making a decision that would land my sister and me in some horrific situation.
Speaker1	Homeless.
Speaker1	Friendless.
Speaker1	Penniless.
Speaker1	At the same time, the pressure to make every decision right now was staggering.
Speaker1	I was keenly aware that Grace and I had a little bit of time and a little bit of money, and that both would be gone in no time at all.
Speaker1	I needed to find a way to take care of us.
Speaker1	I needed to be responsible.
Speaker1	I needed a job immediately—since I’d graduated from Washburn four years earlier, I’d only worked for the family law firm, which was clearly no longer a possibility.
Speaker1	And if the apocalypse wasn’t imminent, as Westboro had been proclaiming for years, then I was behind in heeding the counsel of my business professors by nearly a decade already.
Speaker1	Two days after leaving Westboro, I panicked to Newbery: “I need to start saving for retirement!” It was a stand-in for my every failure to prepare for this life, and the adrenaline coursing through me was not appeased by Newbery’s assurances that I had plenty of time to figure things out.
Speaker1	And beneath the urgency and the loss and the yawning chasm of uncertainty, there was a deeper sort of terror: that no matter what I did, I was spinning my wheels in a futile effort to outpace the wrath of God reserved for the children of disobedience.
Speaker1	My grip on the steering wheel tightened as I imagined my little black Pontiac spinning off into a ditch, smashing into a concrete divide, crumpling into a mass of metal and broken bones protruding from torn, sizzling flesh resting in pools of blood after a head-on collision with a southbound semi and—
Speaker1	Stop!
Speaker1	I ordered myself.
Speaker1	I unclenched my fists again.
Speaker1	Sat back.
Speaker1	Slowed my breath.
Speaker1	Tried to still the tremors in my limbs.
Speaker1	I looked out the window, where no grisly scene awaited.
Speaker1	The sun was bright and the fields along the interstate were vast and glistening with frost.
Speaker1	Iowa, just after 8 A.M.
Speaker1	I glanced over at my sleeping sister in the passenger seat.
Speaker1	Though we shared our grief and fear, Grace’s disposition could not have been more of a contrast to mine.
Speaker1	Where I wanted to cautiously reason and agonize over each decision, she seemed possessed by every emotion that came over her.
Speaker1	Whatever she felt in any given moment was a call to action that needed no review and no revision, and she didn’t appreciate my offering them.
Speaker1	When Grace had first suggested an escape in the days after we left—running away to France was her actual proposal—I rejected the idea.
Speaker1	She couldn’t possibly be serious, could she?
Speaker1	“If we can’t have our family,” I’d told her, both of us in tears, “then it doesn’t matter if we’re thirty minutes away from them or three thousand miles.
Speaker1	Nothing will bring them back to us.” I had argued that running away from that reality wouldn’t change anything; it would only waste our ever-dwindling resources.
Speaker1	She had just a few weeks left of the semester, anyway.
Speaker1	Did she want to waste all the effort she’d already put in?
Speaker1	None of these practicalities moved my sister.
Speaker1	She was still determined to go, weeping in desperate frustration and despair that I refused.
Speaker1	If I truly cared about her, Grace reasoned, then I would go with her.
Speaker1	But after two weeks, I’d started to realize that Grace was right.
Speaker1	It did matter that we were still so close to home.
Speaker1	I’d thought that staying with Libby and her husband would be ideal: Libby had been one of my best friends before she left Westboro three and a half years earlier, and I thought we could pick up right where we left off.
Speaker1	And while spending time with her helped me start to find some perspective—not to mention comic relief—it quickly became clear that the thirty miles between Westboro and her home in Lawrence weren’t nearly enough.
Speaker1	We were commuting to Topeka four days a week for Grace’s classes, and though it was a city of 140,000, we seemed to run into our family everywhere.
Speaker1	We saw them while driving by pickets on the way to school.
Speaker1	At the mall.
Speaker1	The university.
Speaker1	I was shopping for groceries while Grace was in class one evening, turning into an aisle only to immediately duck back around the corner—there was Margie, reaching for an item on the top shelf at the far end.
Speaker1	When I spoke to Newbery of these incidents, he didn’t seem to understand my overpowering physiological need to conceal myself from their gaze, and I couldn’t explain it.
Speaker1	No, they wouldn’t yell at me.
Speaker1	They wouldn’t attack me or otherwise make a scene.
Speaker1	They would just pretend that I didn’t exist.
Speaker1	To say that I hid to avoid judgment and the silent treatment could not convey or justify the depths of that savage instinct to hide, but it was the best I could come up with.
Speaker1	I couldn’t bear to think of the things my siblings would hear from the rest of the church members, who made it a habit to report back whenever they saw ex-members.
Speaker1	If Grace and I seemed in good spirits, we would be considered foolish and bestial, not recognizing how vain and worthless our lives now were.
Speaker1	If we seemed mournful, we were pathetic, feeling the sentence of death in ourselves.
Speaker1	In their eyes, we would never be truly happy—and we were delusional if we thought we could be.
Speaker1	And then there were the messages from church members that stopped my heart each time they appeared on my phone’s screen.
Speaker1	They’d begun back at home, the moment word got to the rest of the church that Grace and I were leaving, but I had assumed they would stop once we were gone.
Speaker1	They did not.
Speaker1	Gran texted me the morning following our departure: “You need to consider the rebellion of Korah!!!!
Speaker1	FLEE the wrath to come!” Jael sent several text messages and emails, as well, and she had changed my name to “Korah” in her phone.
Speaker1	In a way, it was nice to know the narrative church members were spinning in my absence.
Speaker1	Korah was a biblical figure who publicly challenged the legitimacy of Moses’s leadership over the children of Israel.
Speaker1	As a result, God made a spectacular display of demonstrating that He had chosen Moses: He caused the earth to open up and swallow Korah, his cohorts, and their families—including their little children.
Speaker1	They, and all that appertained to them, went down alive into the pit, and the earth closed upon them: and they perished from among the congregation.
Speaker1	Afterward, God had sent fire and then a fast-moving plague to kill all who supported Korah.
Speaker1	At the end of it all, about fifteen thousand were dead.
Speaker1	On receiving these messages from Gran and Jael, I’d read the story again and was struck by how much my complaints about Westboro’s elders sounded like Korah’s complaint against Moses: Ye take too much upon you, seeing all the congregation are holy, every one of them, and the Lord is among them: wherefore then lift ye up yourselves above the congregation of the Lord?
Speaker1	A pang of fear had gripped me, but I’d thought for a moment.
Speaker1	Moses had been established as the Lord’s chosen leader via direct interaction with God Himself and a series of miracles—among them the parting of the Red Sea, the pillar of cloud that led the Israelites by day, and the pillar of fire that gave them light by night.
Speaker1	Westboro’s elders had no such evidence to support their claim to unquestionable authority, and quite the opposite: their legacy was a series of unscriptural edicts and contradictory doctrines.
Speaker1	They were not Moses.
Speaker1	I was not Korah.
Speaker1	And I would not be intimidated by their decision to paint me as such.
Speaker1	In truth, once the first wave of fear passed, the comparison even struck me as genuinely funny: in place of a man who’d incited the revolt of thousands, there was me, perennial nerd and consummate good girl, leading a rebellion of two alongside my sundress-wearing sidekick.
Speaker1	They gave us—and themselves—far too much credit.
Speaker1	Still, I remembered back to the days just after Josh left.
Speaker1	Anger and indignation had been so much easier to tolerate than grief.
Speaker1	The messages kept coming.
Speaker1	One of my aunts called to tell me that I had destroyed my sister.
Speaker1	“It’s because of you that Grace has been able to go down this path to certain destruction.
Speaker1	You weren’t content to take your own soul to Hell—you had to drag your sister down with you.” Her voice had sounded cautious at first, but quickly took on a vicious disgust.
Speaker1	I didn’t know what to say.
Speaker1	There was a good chance that she was right, and that things would go horribly wrong.
Speaker1	I knew I couldn’t take responsibility for Grace’s decisions, but if she got hurt, there was no way I wouldn’t blame myself.
Speaker1	Two weeks after our departure, I received a text message from Margie accusing me of modesty violations and of fabricating reasons to leave because of my “lust.” Since I had been dressing exactly the same since leaving Westboro, I was confused.
Speaker1	We went back and forth for a little while, and I tried to reiterate some of the actual reasons I left, but she just couldn’t hear me.
Speaker1	She could acknowledge no wrongdoing on the part of the church.
Speaker1	This, she insisted, was all my fault.
Speaker1	“If your heart gets broken and you are ashamed,” she wrote, “reach out.
Speaker1	Otherwise this is done.” I had sighed.
Speaker1	Clearly, there was no point in continuing the conversation, and I cried to Newbery in bitter frustration.
Speaker1	NEWBERY: I guess it’s important to remember that they are trying to deal with this, too.
Speaker1	They don’t know what to do any more than you do, but what they do still have is the church and the “certainty” that comes with that.
Speaker1	And it’s all they have to try to find answers and deal with it.
Speaker1	I suppose that’s a long way to go to get to an idea that is much harder than it sounds, which is: I think you need to try not to take it personally.
Speaker1	The only aunt and cousin I think you *really* need to remember is the one you knew when you were still there.
Speaker1	The rest is just coping and probably fear.
Speaker1	I remembered what it was like on that side of this divide, and I knew that Newbery was right.
Speaker1	But I was dismayed to realize that even while paying the enormous cost of leaving Westboro, Grace and I were still under the judgmental gaze of its members.
Speaker1	How could we possibly move on while living in the shadow of the church?
Speaker1	It was time to go.
Speaker1	Just beyond the WELCOME TO SOUTH DAKOTA sign, the speed limit bumped up to 75 miles an hour.
Speaker1	I hit the gas and barreled on.
Speaker1	We arrived at our destination at 4:15 P.M., just as the sun was setting over the Black Hills.
Speaker1	I’d first seen them on the horizon about an hour earlier, rising ominously from a dense mist toward thick cloud cover that had cast a pall over everything since we’d crossed the Missouri River around midday.
Speaker1	Grace read the Wikipedia page aloud: “The hills were so-called because of their dark appearance from a distance, as they were covered in trees.” As we drew nearer, I realized it was true—an endless array of pine.
Speaker1	Grace looked up from her phone and we stared out at the clusters of trees with every branch and needle covered in a delicate sheet of ice.
Speaker1	The fog made it seem like they sprang up and frosted just for our eyes’ amusement.
Speaker1	“It looks like Narnia,” she marveled.
Speaker1	The road through Black Hills National Forest wasn’t especially icy, but I steered around the sharp curves with overmuch caution anyway.
Speaker1	My eyes kept darting away from the road to a series of small signs reading WHY DIE?—memorials for victims of fatal car crashes, I would learn later—which further elevated my sense of foreboding.
Speaker1	The question called to mind a verse my mother referenced often.
Speaker1	Cast away from you all your transgressions, whereby ye have transgressed; and make you a new heart and a new spirit: for why will ye die, O house of Israel?
Speaker1	“Repent!” I could hear my mother say.
Speaker1	“Why will ye die?
Speaker1	!”
Speaker1	Twelve hours on the road had landed Grace and me here in Deadwood.
Speaker1	My sister had wanted to go to a beach, but I was afraid to spend that kind of money.
Speaker1	I thought we should find a destination that was less expensive and reachable by car, and I’d been drawn to Deadwood for several reasons.
Speaker1	Its isolation and beauty.
Speaker1	The fact that my brother Sam had been a fan of HBO’s television series by the same name.
Speaker1	And though there was no chance of running into C.G.
Speaker1	on this trip—his home was 400 miles away—some pathetic part of me was heartened at the prospect of sharing his beloved home state for a while.
Speaker1	Having just learned about the home-sharing company Airbnb, I’d searched their website for “Deadwood” on a whim, and the very first hit had looked like destiny: the attic room of a huge, Victorian-era house set on a steep hillside in the city’s historic Presidential District, a long-term restoration project taken on by its owners, a young couple named Dustin and Laura Floyd.
Speaker1	They were preparing to run their home as an inn.
Speaker1	I liked the premise of Airbnb, but since I was a bit anxious about the reality of sleeping in the home of strangers, I looked them up on Google before our trip.
Speaker1	The website of TDG Communications, a Deadwood marketing firm, listed Dustin as its co-owner and Laura as an administrator.
Speaker1	Looking at their silly photos, biographies, and job titles—“benevolent overlord,” “administrative goddess”—I figured they were probably safe.
Speaker1	With the nose pointed down the steep incline, I threw my car into park and stepped out into the brisk afternoon, Grace following a second later.
Speaker1	We opened the back end and stared past our visible breath for a beat: every inch of space had been filled with backpacks full of clothes, coats, boots, the comforter I’d slept with since sixth grade, Grace-approved foods like chips, bagels, and English muffins, and two hefty boxes full of books.
Speaker1	Our heads snapped up as a petite young woman—just a few years older than me, I guessed, early thirties—suddenly appeared on the broad porch, descending the front steps with a warm “Hell-o!
Speaker1	You must be Megan and Grace!
Speaker1	I’m Laura, I’ll show you to your room!” She stepped carefully over the curbside mound of packed snow, paused at the overflowing trunk—“Does all this come inside?”—and grabbed the nearest box to lead the way to the attic.
Speaker1	The three of us maneuvered the contents of my vehicle through the cramped mudroom, past a small room with wood floors, up two flights of stairs that creaked with every step, and into the room I’d seen in the Airbnb photos: L-shaped with scuffed hardwood floors, two large windows overlooking the neighborhood, and steep rooflines that made constant vigilance essential: though twelve feet high at its center, the ceiling sloped precipitously downward until it was just four feet at the room’s edges.
Speaker1	Laura gave us a few pointers about the town, told us which way to go if we cared to wander around, and then left us to head back to the office.
Speaker1	Grace and I stood in the attic in the midst of all the boxes, silent for a moment, assessing the space, planning.
Speaker1	We spent the next couple of hours rearranging the room.
Speaker1	We slid the queen-sized bed into the southeast corner, under the lowest part of the ceiling.
Speaker1	Beneath the low slope on the west side, the boxes of books and empty suitcases.
Speaker1	Clothes in the bureau.
Speaker1	Dresses and cardigans on the little rack around the corner, next to a beige-colored door labeled—inexplicably and in sloppy blue marker across the top of the door—JANE’S ATTIC.
Speaker1	We speculated as to who this Jane might be—a ghostly old woman haunting the gold miner she widowed?
Speaker1	A young woman fleeing an arranged marriage?—while we organized our books and filled the recently remodeled bathroom with bottles of shampoo and conditioner and the rest of our toiletries.
Speaker1	Finally, I spread my old comforter over the bed, and we sat down on top of it.
Speaker1	“What now?” Gracie asked.
Speaker1	I looked around.
Speaker1	There was still a bit more to unpack, but we’d been at it for two hours already.
Speaker1	“Well—” I started.
Speaker1	“Let’s go explore!”
Speaker1	Snow was just beginning to fall in thick flurries as we made our way down the hill in the darkness, but once we left the residential section and neared Deadwood’s Main Street, the lights seemed almost as bright as daytime.
Speaker1	SILVERADO screamed the sign in front of the first casino we came to, row after row of slot machines visible through the front windows.
Speaker1	We turned north onto Lower Main to find what looked to have been a thriving downtown at some point—casinos, restaurants, hotels, boutique clothing stores, and souvenir shops—each trying to look as if they still belonged in the Old West.
Speaker1	But like the brick road they lined, each appeared to be nearly deserted.
Speaker1	Many of the souvenir shops were already closed, but we stared through their windows anyway.
Speaker1	It still felt almost criminal to simply wander around with no rules.
Speaker1	We could take as much time as we wanted.
Speaker1	We could go anywhere we liked.
Speaker1	And we needed absolutely no reason at all.
Speaker1	The freedom was heady.
Speaker1	We kept going, past Pam’s Purple Door, past the Bullock Hotel, Belle Joli winery, Tin Lizzie’s, and the Gem Saloon.
Speaker1	We admired the decorative streetlamps wrapped in snow-dusted garlands that lined both sides of the street, and followed their alternating red and green bulbs all the way to the end of the road: the Four Aces.
Speaker1	The entrance opened directly onto a brightly lit gaming floor, with the musical noise of slot machines and tables for blackjack and three-card poker.
Speaker1	Aside from a large man slumped in front of a slot machine in the next room, the only people visible were casino employees: a couple of dealers, the bartender, and a maintenance worker.
Speaker1	One of the dealers gave me an inordinately long stare, but I averted my gaze and continued on.
Speaker1	Grace and I pulled up chairs at the bar and sat down.
Speaker1	It was my first time at a bar—Grace had gone with friends a couple of times back in Kansas—but I tried to play it cool and pretend I wasn’t freaked out by the whole experience.
Speaker1	On the other side of the counter, a pretty, thirty-something blonde in a short black skirt, a revealing white button-up, and plenty of eyeliner turned around and gave us a maternal smile.
Speaker1	She’d have to check our IDs.
Speaker1	I told her that Grace wasn’t twenty-one and I wasn’t drinking, so there was no need.
Speaker1	She looked puzzled but smiled and offered us hot chocolate.
Speaker1	We sipped it through tiny red and white straws and chatted with her.
Speaker1	“Cora,” she said, extending a hand.
Speaker1	“So … what are you girls doing here?”
Speaker1	We explained, giving the least amount of information possible: that we were visiting town for a month, between Grace’s fall and spring semesters.
Speaker1	That we didn’t really know anything about the area.
Speaker1	And that we had come to read books.
Speaker1	Cora’s smile was broad.
Speaker1	“Books!” She laughed.
Speaker1	She seemed to think we were hilarious, and her voice had a gentle warmth that made me like her immediately.
Speaker1	I forgot to be guarded.
Speaker1	It started off innocently enough: Why Deadwood?
Speaker1	I told Cora that our eldest brother was a fan of the show on HBO.
Speaker1	“Your eldest brother?” she wondered.
Speaker1	“How many siblings do you have?”
Speaker1	“There are eleven of us total,” I answered automatically.
Speaker1	“Eleven!
Speaker1	Your family must be religious.”
Speaker1	“Baptist,” I said.
Speaker1	“What kind of Baptist?”
Speaker1	My eyes widened.
Speaker1	How had we gotten here so fast?
Speaker1	“Independent,” I dodged.
Speaker1	She nodded sagely.
Speaker1	Maybe it was my tone or my expression, or maybe Grace and I were unwittingly giving off a “runaways” vibe, but Cora seemed to intuit that our family’s religion and our presence in Deadwood were not entirely unrelated.
Speaker1	She began to tell us about her mother, a woman who had created a religion of her own by cobbling together elements of Judaism and fringe Christian denominations.
Speaker1	“My mother was very ‘book smart,’ and she read a lot about a lot of different religions.
Speaker1	She was very strict.
Speaker1	She thought she knew better than everybody else.
Speaker1	The whole world was wrong, but she had figured it all out.
Speaker1	Very strict, very controlling.”