Speaker1	Chapter two.
Speaker1	The Bounds of Our Habitation
Speaker1	Throughout my childhood, my mother was determined to make my siblings and me understand one idea above all: We were not in charge of our lives, but God—and that God ruled via the parents and elders He had set over us.
Speaker1	Our duty was singular: to obey them.
Speaker1	Children, obey your parents in all things: for this is well pleasing unto the Lord.
Speaker1	Their power over us was absolute, and we would do well to accept that without question or protest.
Speaker1	These were, as the New Testament put it, the bounds of our habitation.
Speaker1	It was one of my mother’s favorite phrases.
Speaker1	In Westboro’s theology, obedience was about more than family life.
Speaker1	My mother began trying to get this across to us as soon as we were old enough to understand words, and my earliest understanding of it came during a car ride we took together.
Speaker1	I was settled in the backseat of our white Toyota Camry, with Bekah buckled into the seat next to me and our mother at the wheel.
Speaker1	I think we were headed to or from the family law office, but some parts of the recollection are slippery—sometimes I look over and Bekah is in a car seat, sometimes not, sometimes it’s winter, sometimes spring—so I can’t be sure.
Speaker1	What I do remember is that we were young enough to each have a Barbie doll in our laps, and that Mom was telling us about predestination.
Speaker1	My mother’s ardent love for the Scriptures manifested itself in many ways, but it was especially apparent in the joy she took in teaching the Bible for its own sake—not when one of us had disobeyed and needed correction, but while she read and expounded upon the stories to us, taking care to make sure we understood the complexities as well as we could at any given age, going a little deeper each time we returned to the same story.
Speaker1	For precept must be upon precept, precept upon precept; line upon line, line upon line; here a little, and there a little.
Speaker1	She was revealing to us the secret ways in which the world worked, and Bekah and I were full of questions.
Speaker1	In the car that day, we were trying for the first time—but certainly not the last—to wrap our young minds around the idea that everything we did, every word, every deed, every blink of an eye, beat of the heart, twitch of a muscle—all had been caused by God, who worketh all things after the counsel of his own will.
Speaker1	My first response to this assertion was to do what I assume many people do upon discovering predestination: to make a split-second decision and suddenly shift course in an attempt to prove the idea false.
Speaker1	With all my strength, I squeezed my fists into tiny balls, fingernails biting into my palms, and then released.
Speaker1	Had God seen that coming?
Speaker1	My eyes widened as I realized that the doctrine of predestination was impossible to thwart; God controlled even those impulsive flailings, even the impulses themselves.
Speaker1	(“Unfalsifiability” was not yet a term in my repertoire, and so presented no difficulty for me at the time.)
Speaker1	Mom continued on, telling the story of Jacob and Esau to illustrate predestination.
Speaker1	It wasn’t the long version of their story from the Old Testament, of Jacob’s deceit in securing the blessing of the firstborn and of Esau’s vow of murderous revenge.
Speaker1	Instead, our mother focused on the most salient part of their tale, found in the book of Romans: their fates.
Speaker1	Jacob and Esau had been grandsons of the patriarch Abraham—twin grandsons, Mom stressed, as biologically similar as it was possible for two humans to be.
Speaker1	“And yet!
Speaker1	Before those two boys were even born, God loved Jacob and hated Esau.
Speaker1	They hadn’t done anything good or bad to deserve it.
Speaker1	They were still in their mother’s womb!” In the Bible, she told us, God is likened to a heavenly Potter, with humans as clay in His hands to mold as He pleases.
Speaker1	Cannot I do with you as this potter?
Speaker1	saith the Lord.
Speaker1	Behold, as the clay is in the potter’s hand, so are ye in mine hand.
Speaker1	God had elected—chosen—the beloved Jacob for honor, to be welcomed into Heaven for an eternity of bliss.
Speaker1	His twin brother, Esau, meanwhile, had been created to be condemned to Hellfire—all through no fault or cause of his own.
Speaker1	For the children being not yet born, neither having done any good or evil, that the purpose of God according to election might stand, not of works … As it is written, Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated.
Speaker1	But Jacob and Esau weren’t the only ones created with their fates predetermined, Mom continued.
Speaker1	Indeed, these twins were the standing symbols of the two types of people living in the world: the elect, represented by Jacob, chosen by God for love, mercy, honor, glory; and the reprobate, represented by Esau, chosen by God for hatred, cruelty, wrath, destruction.
Speaker1	Of all the people who had ever existed or ever would, only a precious few were God’s elect.
Speaker1	Narrow is the way, which leadeth unto life, and few there be that find it.
Speaker1	The vast majority, both of the living and of the dead, were created for destruction.
Speaker1	For wide is the gate, and broad is the way, that leadeth to destruction, and many there be which go in thereat.
Speaker1	My mother must have been through this story over and over ad nauseam through the years, but she spoke as if it were the first time, her tone filled with impossible awe—as if she still couldn’t believe the elegance of this scenario, as if the beauty of this divine truth could come only from the mind of God Himself.
Speaker1	I was puzzled.
Speaker1	My mother seemed elated at something that sounded so dreadfully unfair: that God would create these two brothers to give mercy to one and cruelty to the other, when they had done nothing to deserve either.
Speaker1	Of course, it wasn’t the undeserved kindness that disturbed me—it was the hatred.
Speaker1	Why would God make Esau for evil, and then send Esau to Hell for being evil?
Speaker1	Wasn’t God Himself responsible?
Speaker1	It seemed wrong to condemn Esau for doing what God created him to do.
Speaker1	When I piped up from the backseat to say so, Mom was only too pleased to go on.
Speaker1	I had posed just the objection that the Apostle Paul addresses in his own account of the story: Thou wilt say then unto me, Why doth [God] yet find fault?
Speaker1	For who hath resisted his will?
Speaker1	If we are what God created us to be, how could it be just for Him to punish us?
Speaker1	In modern parlance, Paul’s response to this question amounts to something like “Who the Hell are you, a wretched human being, to ask such a question?” That’s an answer I would have understood, but my mother quoted the apostle’s reply as given in the King James Version: Nay but, O man, who art thou that repliest against God?
Speaker1	Shall the thing formed say to him that formed it, Why hast thou made me thus?
Speaker1	Mom’s eyes met mine in the rearview mirror and I stared blankly.
Speaker1	Searching for a way to help Bekah and me make sense of this conundrum, her eyes lit up as they fell to the dolls in our laps.
Speaker1	“It would be like if those Barbies in your lap stood up and said, ‘Why did you dress me this way?
Speaker1	!’” Mom would always laugh heartily when she described our reactions later: “Your eyes were as big as saucers, you two girls starin’ down at those Barbies like you were afraid they might actually get up and start talkin’ at you!” For decades, this would be my mother’s go-to illustration for those who dared question why God would design most of humanity for the express purpose of tormenting them in Hell for eternity.
Speaker1	Our dolls demonstrated how patently ridiculous it was to presume to ask such a question.
Speaker1	Although I took my mother’s point about the Barbies’ insolence, a more pressing question had presented itself as she laughed at our bug-eyed response to her hypothetical: What about me?
Speaker1	Was I a Jacob or an Esau?
Speaker1	What about Bekah?
Speaker1	What about Sam and Josh?
Speaker1	How could we know?
Speaker1	From the driver’s seat, Mom somberly explained that we couldn’t.
Speaker1	That we wouldn’t know for sure until we all stood before God at the Judgment.
Speaker1	Her words filled me with dread, calling forth a mental image of the whole world awaiting judgment at the feet of God, standing at rapt attention like an army of the damned—and me, standing among them.
Speaker1	What could I do to avoid a ruinous outcome?
Speaker1	Predestination, clearly, had not yet sunk into my little skull—of course, I could do nothing to change my fate if God had chosen me for Hell—but my mother understood my need for comfort.
Speaker1	“It’s a good sign that you’re afraid,” she said.
Speaker1	“It means that you care what God requires of you.” Come, ye children, hearken unto me: I will teach you the fear of the Lord.
Speaker1	Many more years and innumerable Bible studies would pass before I fully and practically appreciated the meaning of this doctrine—that a person’s goodness was a symptom of God’s love, the effect of it, and not the cause—but I soon found predestination an immediate and compelling motivator.
Speaker1	Its power came from beauty and from terror, a confluence of two desires.
Speaker1	There was the desire to be like Jacob, to be one of God’s jewels, with all the rarity, purity, and virtue that signified.
Speaker1	And they shall be mine, saith the Lord of hosts, in that day when I make up my jewels; and I will spare them, as a man spareth his own son that serveth him.
Speaker1	And then there was the abject fear of being like the despised Esau, before of old ordained to this condemnation.
Speaker1	We were powerless to alter our destiny, but the surest sign we could have that we were one of God’s elect?
Speaker1	Our obedience.
Speaker1	I came to love the clarity and simplicity of this idea, how directly the Scriptures connected obedience to goodness.
Speaker1	It was even implicated in God’s commandment to “love thy neighbor.” Thou shalt not hate thy brother in thine heart: thou shalt in any wise rebuke thy neighbour, and not suffer sin upon him.
Speaker1	Thou shalt not avenge, nor bear any grudge against the children of thy people, but thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.
Speaker1	The context made it abundantly clear to us that to love our neighbor was to rebuke him, to warn him away from the sins that would result in punishment from God.
Speaker1	If we failed to do so, the blood of the wicked would be on our hands.
Speaker1	When I say unto the wicked, Thou shalt surely die; and thou givest him not warning, nor speakest to warn the wicked from his wicked way, to save his life; the same wicked man shall die in his iniquity; but his blood will I require at thine hand.
Speaker1	We had taken to the streets because we had a solemn duty to obey God and to plead with our neighbors to do the same.
Speaker1	It didn’t matter that the world hated the message.
Speaker1	It didn’t matter that it required vast amounts of our time, money, energy, resources.
Speaker1	This was what God required of His elect.
Speaker1	Whatever it cost us, we would pay.
Speaker1	While our daily protests were an explosion of overt hostility between my family and the city, school was a subtler matter.
Speaker1	The decision to send us to public school was due primarily to practical considerations: the adults needed to work in order to support their growing families and the church, which refused all (exceedingly rare) donations from nonmembers.
Speaker1	But once it became clear that our protests would continue for years and decades to come, the elders came to a few additional conclusions.
Speaker1	First, that our presence in public school classrooms was a testimony against the people of Topeka: though they accused us of being hateful, we were polite, friendly, well-behaved, and accomplished students.
Speaker1	Having your conversation honest among the Gentiles: that, whereas they speak against you as evildoers, they may by your good works, which they shall behold, glorify God in the day of visitation.
Speaker1	Our parents described us as “walking picket signs.” They also weren’t especially afraid that we would be unduly influenced by our peers or teachers, that we might be persuaded to doubt or question Westboro’s teachings.
Speaker1	The intensity of our daily religious education at home was a bulwark against such heresies.
Speaker1	Plus, they were in possession of divine truth.
Speaker1	They weren’t afraid of questions, because they had all the answers.
Speaker1	For my part, school seemed to be an elaborate play where each of the actors—teachers, classmates, parents—pretended not to notice that we were on opposite sides of an epic, spiritual battle between good and evil.
Speaker1	It was a tenuous truce that relied heavily on the First Amendment: no matter how much they disagreed with us or how often we picketed their churches, teachers were agents of government and barred from punishing us for our religious activities.
Speaker1	But more, it relied on mutual consent to keep up the pretense—our shared willingness not to speak, for instance, of the nine-foot-tall picket sign that called out the citizenry as TOPEKA: A CITY OF WHORES at pickets after school.
Speaker1	It wasn’t easy for me to separate my life at the elementary school from the rest of my existence, and I had to learn that skill the hard way.
Speaker1	One day in first grade, I tried to deepen my friendship with a classmate, Megan G., by taking her into my confidence during recess.
Speaker1	Cupping my hands around my mouth and leaning in close, I whispered into her ear that our music teacher was “a fag” and not to be trusted.
Speaker1	When I’d heard this warning from my mother at home, I’d thought of Mrs. Epoch’s dark hair and dark eyes and plump figure and began imagining her as the menacing witch from one of the fairy tales Dad sometimes performed for us before bed, Hansel and Gretel.
Speaker1	Plus, she was Jewish!
Speaker1	I thought Megan G. should know to be careful, but she, duly horrified, tattled immediately, and I was hauled into the principal’s office, sobbing in shame.
Speaker1	My mom took me aside that night to help me understand, and I knew that she was right when she told me about these people.
Speaker1	“Every single thing you do reflects on this church.
Speaker1	These people don’t care about you!
Speaker1	They wouldn’t think twice about hurting you in order to hurt the church!
Speaker1	More than anyone else, our behavior has to be above reproach.
Speaker1	School is not the time or the place for this discussion.
Speaker1	You’re there to learn.” Thenceforth, I kept my standard postscript (“PS: God hates fags!”) out of notes passed to my cousins and confined to the diary I locked with a tiny metal key.
Speaker1	Despite the knowledge that I couldn’t trust my teachers or classmates with anything but pleasantries, I adored school.
Speaker1	My sister Bekah could be relied upon to regularly chase the van down Arnold Street after our mom dropped us off in the morning, begging Mom to take her home, but I could never understand why.
Speaker1	There were no chores at school, no crying babies, no laundry, no vacuuming.
Speaker1	We only had to learn.
Speaker1	It was the freest time we had, and became the portal to my favorite place: books.
Speaker1	Once I mastered reading, my nose was always stuck in one: under the table at dinner, pushing kids on the swing set out back, or hiding in the stairwell (close at hand but out of sight, so I was less likely to be called on for errands).
Speaker1	Mom or Dad or Sam would take us to the Topeka Public Library, and Josh and I would load ourselves down with armfuls.
Speaker1	And when the library began a new service that let us request books to be sent to us by mail—for free?
Speaker1	“Katie, bar the door,” Mom said.
Speaker1	My literary choices were heavily influenced by Josh’s penchant for science fiction—R.
Speaker1	L. Stine’s Goosebumps and Fear Street series, Christopher Pike’s The Last Vampire, the Animorphs books by K. A. Applegate, and once I hit third grade, anything written by Stephen King.
Speaker1	We had wide latitude in our consumption of books, television, film, and music, and for much the same reason that we attended public schools: our parents weren’t particularly worried about negative influences slipping into our minds undetected.
Speaker1	They’d prepared us too well for that, and our response to depictions of sinful behavior was instinctive.
Speaker1	Whore.
Speaker1	Criminal.
Speaker1	Adulterer.
Speaker1	When fundamentalists would approach us and tout their decision to rid their homes of television and secular music, our response was chastisement.
Speaker1	“How can you preach against the abominable teachings that litter the landscape of this nation if you don’t even know what they are?” my mom would admonish.
Speaker1	I cherished the time I spent peering into alternate realities, and each day I’d race through my schoolwork so that I could escape into them: worlds where I had no responsibilities and lives that bore no resemblance whatsoever to my own.
Speaker1	In truth, school itself became an escape for me—an escape from Mom and the frequent eruptions of her caustic temper.
Speaker1	This was a fact that I acknowledged to myself uneasily, with a deep awareness of how foolish, how melodramatic I was being.
Speaker1	I had a good life, I was always told.
Speaker1	The best life, one filled with people who loved God and hated evil and would teach me the truth about the world, unlike my misfortunate classmates.
Speaker1	Still, I couldn’t deny the relief I felt when we’d finally pile into the van at the end of the often-nightmarish period between waking and school.
Speaker1	It was nearly impossible to get through those two hours without a meltdown of some kind, without at least one of us at the other end of Mom’s razor tongue or even the big paddle—a three-foot-long, one-and-a-half-inch dowel rod she’d started using on me in second grade, when I’d spent fifteen seconds admiring a cousin’s gingerbread house after school instead of coming straight to the van (my delay forced her to hold up traffic on the narrow street in front of the school).
Speaker1	The expectation of total obedience may have been the same in every Westboro family, but no one exacted it as vigorously, tenaciously, or continuously as my mother.
Speaker1	I harbored few desires stronger than the one for her approval, but her standards seemed always to be shifting, tightening like a noose until I felt choked with the futility of my own rage.
Speaker1	I wasn’t the only one.
Speaker1	Just sixteen months apart, little Bekah and I were sworn enemies all through grade school, engaging in sisterly combat at every opportunity.
Speaker1	On one particularly explosive morning when I was eight or nine, she and I got two beatings each—for fighting, and for insufficient progress on our piano lessons—and they were bad.
Speaker1	They were the sort that left big red welts, the kind that would bloom into bruises of blue and purple and black and finally yellow as I examined them before my bath each night.
Speaker1	The blueness of a wound cleanseth away evil.
Speaker1	Chasten thy son while there is hope, and let not thy soul spare for his crying.
Speaker1	After the beatings that morning, I was the first to make my way to the van for school, relieved to be getting out of the house and away from the immediate danger, but my sister was furious.
Speaker1	Bekah was a matchstick of a girl, yet what she lacked in size she made up for in the force of her temper—and that day it was directed at our mom.
Speaker1	When Bekah slammed the van door behind her, waiting for Mom to climb in and take us to school, her pixie face was a bright red splotch.
Speaker1	She clenched her jaw, teeth grinding, and erupted: “I’m going to tell my teacher about this!
Speaker1	FUCK.
Speaker1	HER!” She let out a wild, wordless scream with all the rage her runty self could muster.
Speaker1	Mom came out the door and down the steps a moment later.
Speaker1	I wanted Bekah to tell.
Speaker1	I was petrified Bekah would tell.
Speaker1	I envisioned a black and white police car pulling up to our driveway to take us away from Mom and Dad, and my heart surged, clutching for them.
Speaker1	No one made hot chocolate like Mom, who was always standing over the stove singing and stirring a pot full of it when we came back from sledding the big hill at Quinton Heights.
Speaker1	And no one could do bedtime like Dad, pretending to be a helicopter as he cradled us in his arms, vroom-vrooming us one at a time from the living room, up the stairs, around the big banister, and down the hall to our rooms for bedtime stories that always ended in tickle fests.
Speaker1	And then I imagined the cops themselves in our driveway—the same cops we serenaded with accusations of “corpulent coward!,” the same cops who let those big oafs punch and choke us on the picket line.
Speaker1	I knew what I had to do.
Speaker1	We only made it a few blocks on the way to school before I told Mom of Bekah’s threat, even though I was terrified of what Mom would do to her for it.
Speaker1	“DO YOU REALLY THINK THE LORD IS GOING TO LET YOU SABOTAGE US?”
Speaker1	My face flushed hot and I felt sick as I watched the van pull away from the school with Bekah still in it.
Speaker1	I wouldn’t have wished Mom’s unbridled fury on anyone, not even my sister-nemesis—but I had to protect us.
Speaker1	These people were evil.
Speaker1	No one outside of Westboro cared about us.
Speaker1	They were always and only after the church.
Speaker1	Everything always came back to that.
Speaker1	Westboro Baptist Church sat on a quiet street lined with trees and ranch-style homes, many of which belonged to my aunts, uncles, and cousins.
Speaker1	An eight-foot-tall stockade fence ran around the block’s perimeter, enclosing our common backyard and cutting inward to exclude the two houses that didn’t belong to church members.
Speaker1	The whole setup had led many a contemptuous reporter to call our block a “compound”—implying some sort of spooky, David Koresh–style cult scenario—but my mother always cut them off when they spoke in such terms.
Speaker1	The fence was originally built when the pool was put in, she’d tell them, back in the seventies.
Speaker1	“You’re talkin’ to a bunch of lawyers,” she would chide, “and that pool is called an ‘attractive nuisance’ in the law.
Speaker1	If that fence weren’t there, and some child wandered over off the street and fell in, we would be liable for that.
Speaker1	It’s that simple.” People were always acting like we were crazy, like there must be some sort of nefarious scheme being hatched and meticulously cultivated behind our fences at every moment, but “we’re just people!” Mom would insist.