Speaker1	Chapter three.
Speaker1	The Wars of the Lord
Speaker1	Three days after nineteen hijackers crashed four commercial aircraft into the World Trade Center towers, the Pentagon, and a field in rural Pennsylvania, a lamentation sounded forth from Westboro Baptist Church pastor Fred Phelps.
Speaker1	It was not a mournful cry for the thousands who had been murdered.
Speaker1	It did not echo the grieving prayers sent up by thousands more whose loved ones had perished in wreckage and rubble.
Speaker1	It did not reverberate with the near-universal horror that overtook the world, nor with anguish at the unspeakable atrocities that human beings are capable of visiting upon one another.
Speaker1	To my grandfather, such sentimentalities were entirely beside the point—and therein lay his grief.
Speaker1	For three days straight, the American media juggernaut had been a continual dirge, wholly devoted to the “caterwauling” of preachers, pundits, and politicians alike.
Speaker1	Of all the “backslidden, hypocritical” preachers and “self-aggrandizing” politicians whose words were filling the airwaves, my grandfather insisted that not a single one was speaking a word of truth as far as the Word of God was concerned.
Speaker1	And the truth was that in the council halls of eternity, God Himself had issued the command, sending those airplanes like missiles through time and space, casting down these symbols of American strength and vitality in punishment for her great sins: homosexuality, adultery, fornication, idolatry, rebellion.
Speaker1	There was no sound among the congregation as our pastor spoke.
Speaker1	Not a cough or a sneeze, not even from the babies—just a somber stillness as we contemplated the exhortations of this holy preacher, referred to as a star in the right hand of God in the book of Revelation.
Speaker1	Regardless of how unpopular or unpalatable his message, we trusted him to preach it with complete faithfulness to the Scriptures, without ambiguity and without timidity, as he’d done for more than fifty years.
Speaker1	He didn’t have the praise of the world, and he didn’t seek it.
Speaker1	His work was unpaid as a matter of principle.
Speaker1	My grandfather would have no financial conflicts of interest, no incentive to abridge the Bible the way he so frequently accused others of doing.
Speaker1	That my grandfather kept himself from such sordid concerns was another layer of assurance of his dedication to preaching the unvarnished Word of God.
Speaker1	I never saw the confidence we had in our pastor as being rooted in the familial relationship he shared with about eighty percent of us, though this was generally presumed by outsiders to be the case.
Speaker1	It was a galling thought—as if we, unique among human beings, would be forever possessed of our childhood credulity.
Speaker1	As if all our faculties of reason, perception, and will could be entirely overruled by blood relation.
Speaker1	It seemed that the goal of this assertion was to render us blind followers of an angry patriarch—because if we could be dismissed as such, it meant that no one need fear the wrath of the God we preached.
Speaker1	In truth, the familial nature of Westboro’s ministry tended to make us, his children and grandchildren, more skeptical of our pastor, not less.
Speaker1	As hecklers and journalists so frequently pointed to it as evidence of the lemming-like nature of our following, his status as “Gramps” became a pit out of which my grandfather had to climb.
Speaker1	The burden of proof weighed the more heavily on him as a result, and he delighted in meeting that burden, utilizing every tool at his disposal to demonstrate the errors of the masses, their failures of logic, law, history, Scripture, righteousness.
Speaker1	My grandfather continued his sermon, which was—like all his sermons—laden with Bible quotes and references to expositors and theologians, evidence to support his frequent assertion that “I do not make this stuff up!” He never appealed to his own authority.
Speaker1	Today’s sermon was a freewheeling condemnation of “fag America,” delivered in an old-time fire-and-brimstone polemic.
Speaker1	But he wasn’t speaking only or even primarily to those of us seated in the austere sanctuary—1960s-era wood-veneer paneling, pews to seat about a hundred, devoid of iconography except a few new picket signs propped on easels flanking the pulpit (THANK GOD FOR SEPT. 11), and carpet a friend would later describe as “shockingly mauve.” This special sermon would be uploaded to GodHatesFags.com, an address to the nation intended to make the power brokers of the world stand up and take notice.
Speaker1	He contrasted America’s maudlin response to the carnage of September 11 to England’s godly call for repentance in 1666, when the Great Fire blazed through London leaving immense destruction in its wake.
Speaker1	He pointed to the old Puritan preachers who had seen the hand of God in that conflagration, proclaiming that the Almighty was punishing the inhabitants of London for their sins—and that England was doomed if they failed to heed God’s warning and repent.
Speaker1	As a fifteen-year-old, I was familiar with some of the Scriptural support for this theology, but it had failed to crystallize in my mind the way it did sitting in my pew that day.
Speaker1	My formative years were an endless stream of opportunities to learn the church’s culture emphasizing the celebration and mockery of tragedy and death, and I had fully assimilated into that culture by the time 9/11 rolled around.
Speaker1	Any misgivings I might have had were long since snuffed out by the verses demonstrating the example of our God, who had declared, Because I have called, and ye refused; I have stretched out my hand, and no man regarded; I also will laugh at your calamity; I will mock when your fear cometh.
Speaker1	And then there was the passage in the book of Psalms: The righteous shall rejoice when he seeth the vengeance: he shall wash his feet in the blood of the wicked.
Speaker1	By age eleven, I was standing on the picket line exultantly repeating the words I’d heard from Gramps: “Two whores in a week!” I fancied myself cutely counterculture to be reveling in the deaths of two widely beloved women, though I had little knowledge of either Mother Teresa or Diana, Princess of Wales.
Speaker1	No matter.
Speaker1	When their deaths came just a few days apart, I knew all I needed: that the one was Catholic, and the other an adulteress.
Speaker1	Elton John rewrote his song “Candle in the Wind” in tribute to Lady Diana, and less than twenty-four hours after he performed it at her funeral service, I was singing along to a chilling parody written by my mom and my aunt:
Speaker1	Goodbye, royal whore
Speaker1	Though you never spoke the truth
Speaker1	You know and hear it now
Speaker1	As do all of this world’s youth
Speaker1	You crashed into the stone wall
Speaker1	As you played your whorish games
Speaker1	They set you on a pedestal
Speaker1	And bow down to your name
Speaker1	But it seems to me you lived your life
Speaker1	Like a harlot full of sin
Speaker1	God cut you off
Speaker1	Now the flames set in
Speaker1	And you know we told you, though you’re
Speaker1	A throne away
Speaker1	Your name will die out long before
Speaker1	The pain will ever sway
Speaker1	Similar scenes played out following every death that caught my grandfather’s attention, everyone from Matthew Shepard (“His lying fag friends can’t help him now!”) to Mr. Rogers (“Sissy Pied Piper From Hell”).
Speaker1	Day after day, month after month, year after year, I took in the gleeful reactions that Gramps modeled until they became mine.
Speaker1	On the morning of 9/11, there was only a split second between a classmate’s frantic announcement of the attacks and my genuine excitement and glee at the demise of “those evil people.” I knew my lines.
Speaker1	When the mayor of New York announced, “We will rebuild,” my memory called up the verse: We will return and build the desolate places; thus saith the Lord of hosts, They shall build, but I will throw down.
Speaker1	When “United We Stand” became the national rallying cry, the simplest retort came from the book of Proverbs: Though hand join in hand, the wicked shall not be unpunished.
Speaker1	And when other Christians insisted that God was not responsible for the calamity that had befallen the American people, many were the passages we would quote to confound their claims: shall there be evil in a city, and the Lord hath not done it?
Speaker1	And again, God insists, See now that I, even I, am he, and there is no god with me: I kill, and I make alive; I wound, and I heal: neither is there any that can deliver out of my hand.
Speaker1	And the Apostle Paul reminds the Ephesians, For this ye know, that no whoremonger, nor unclean person, nor covetous man, who is an idolater, hath any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and of God.
Speaker1	Let no man deceive you with vain words: for because of these things cometh the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience.
Speaker1	This last passage implies that some would deny a causal connection between the sins of men and the wrath of God—and declares that such denials are but vain words intended to deceive.
Speaker1	Clearly, the whole world was deceived—but we weren’t.
Speaker1	How lucky we were to have the favor of God.
Speaker1	What stirred me most during my grandfather’s sermon that September day wasn’t just the oft-repeated refrains from the Bible; it was the historical context he had given these events.
Speaker1	He had invoked “the Puritans of old England,” and the wheels turning in my mind almost audibly screeched to a halt.
Speaker1	There had been people outside of the Bible who actually believed what we believed?
Speaker1	It struck me as unlikely if not impossible, my surprise betraying how acutely myopic was my perspective at the time.
Speaker1	As I experienced it, the modern world had always been deeply inhospitable to our beliefs, and it was easy to feel as if Westboro were an island existing outside of time, the one true connection to a righteous past—the lone bastion of truth in this “insane orgy of fag lies,” as Gramps was wont to say.
Speaker1	He never needed to come right out and declare that our church was the only way to Heaven, not explicitly; that kind of sweeping assertion isn’t so easy to substantiate, and certainly would have invited much more suspicion and scrutiny from my highly analytical family.
Speaker1	Instead, my grandfather studied other churches extensively, teaching us all the ways they were full of error and sin.
Speaker1	Methodists?
Speaker1	Works righteousness.
Speaker1	Catholics?
Speaker1	Idolaters.
Speaker1	Lutherans?
Speaker1	Lukewarm idolaters.
Speaker1	He referred to them as “social clubs” with little interest in knowing or doing what God required of them.
Speaker1	In the era of megachurches and multimillionaire preachers of the prosperity gospel like Joel Osteen, he found the perfect foil: perverse disputings of men of corrupt minds, and destitute of the truth, supposing that gain is godliness.
Speaker1	To us, such pastors were motivated by money, smoothing away the hard corners and sharp edges of Bible truths, sculpting them into enticing figurines to package and sell to ever larger congregations that sought not truth but comfort: which say to the prophets, Prophesy not unto us right things, speak unto us smooth things, prophesy deceits.
Speaker1	Divorce and remarriage had become a national pastime since the institution of no-fault divorce laws in the 1970s, and now “the pews of these churches—these whorehouses, these dog kennels!—are littered with divorced and remarried people!
Speaker1	The Lord Jesus Christ calls them adulterers!” And indeed He had: Whosoever putteth away his wife, and marrieth another, committeth adultery: and whosoever marrieth her that is put away from her husband committeth adultery.
Speaker1	Voice dripping with disdain, my grandfather railed against “Christians” so often in his weekly sermons that I spent my elementary school years believing the term to be synonymous with “evil” and denying that it applied to me.
Speaker1	In the end, we drew the obvious conclusion from his attacks on other faiths—fortified by direct Bible quotes that we carefully memorized: that Westboro was the only safe haven from the wrath of God, both in this life and in the world to come.
Speaker1	But the Puritans had believed—or so Gramps declared.
Speaker1	When the special 9/11 sermon came to a close, I walked home across our common backyard, flipped open the lid of my laptop, and brought up Google, searching for evidence of Gramps’s assertion about the destruction of London.
Speaker1	Had the Puritans really believed as we did?
Speaker1	Did their contemporaries believe them to be the crazy, hateful zealots that ours considered us?
Speaker1	It didn’t take long for me to light upon the words of James Janeway, a popular Puritan minister and writer.
Speaker1	To a city ravaged first by the Great Plague and just after by the Great Fire, Janeway wrote:
Speaker1	The Great and Dreadful God hath been pleading with poor England in these last Years […], and written Divine Displeasure in Letters of Blood.
Speaker1	The Righteous Judge began his Circuit the last Year in London, and in that one City above one hundred thousand received the Sentence of Death from his just Tribunal.
Speaker1	He hath not yet ended his dismal Circuit, but he rideth still […], pleading his Cause with us in a lamentable Fire, which in a few Days space, hath turned one of the most glorious Cities in the World to Ashes.
Speaker1	The Voice of the Sword was not heard; the Language of the Plague was not understood; wherefore the dreadful Jehovah speaks louder and louder still […].
Speaker1	O stupid Creatures that we are, when shall we hear the Rod and him that appointed it!
Speaker1	I read on, astounded.
Speaker1	Here it was, yet more proof—objective proof—that Gramps wasn’t just a hateful man fabricating these doctrines to bolster his preexisting prejudices, as the case was often made.
Speaker1	Janeway was even quoting the same verses that my grandfather had.
Speaker1	I would soon come to learn that this wasn’t the only Westboro doctrine deeply rooted in major branches of Christian theological tradition.
Speaker1	My mother had so carefully used Barbies and Bible verses to explain the concept of predestination to my sister Bekah and me, but centuries before Westboro existed, this view was espoused by Christians the world over.
Speaker1	It was popularized by the reformed theologian John Calvin and summarized by the acronym TULIP, which my grandfather put on a sign that hung behind his pulpit for years:
Speaker1	Total Depravity: All humans are, by nature, slaves to sin and incapable of choosing to follow God.
Speaker1	Unconditional Election: God has chosen who will be saved based solely on His mercy, not their merit.
Speaker1	Limited Atonement: God could have chosen to save all men, but sent Jesus to die only for His elect.
Speaker1	Irresistible Grace: Those chosen by God have no power to resist His call to salvation.
Speaker1	Perseverance of the Saints: God’s elect will persevere to the end and be saved.
Speaker1	These beliefs had long since fallen out of favor with the wider Christian community, and we understood their “evolution”—belief in free will, in universal salvation, in the idea that God loves all of mankind—to be apostasy and betrayal of the plain words of Scripture.
Speaker1	The foolish shall not stand in thy sight: thou hatest all workers of iniquity.
Speaker1	But all of this history, the venerable past of so many of our core doctrines, lent our pastor a substantial new credibility to my mind—and at age fifteen, I found myself newly humbled by his knowledge and understanding.
Speaker1	I had always believed him to be intelligent and guided by God, but youthful condescension had led me to underestimate him.
Speaker1	He was an old man, had trouble understanding technology, frequently slept with the news blaring all night long, and generally smelled of a potent mix of tea tree oil and the cloves of raw garlic he began consuming in copious quantities after watching a segment about its health benefits on one of the television morning shows.
Speaker1	Jesus said, No prophet is accepted in his own country, and that rang true to me; it’s easier to accept a human as divinely ordained when you’re not intimately familiar with the mundanity of their daily life and the eccentricities of their personality.
Speaker1	Church members also actively denied that my grandfather’s history mattered at all, except insofar as it reflected the path on which God had led him; because God had predestinated all things, nothing about our pastor’s life or decisions could be attributed to him or his influence as an individual.
Speaker1	For a long time, both this perspective and the quotidian realities I witnessed caused me to largely dismiss the complex history of a complicated man—a history that multiplied questions like a hydra, each answer producing twice as many curiosities as the one it sought to address.
Speaker1	Instead of replacing her surname with his, my mother combined the two when she married my father in 1983.
Speaker1	It would be the name they gave to their eleven children: Phelps-Roper.
Speaker1	“We wanted you kids to have the Phelps name.
Speaker1	That name means something around here.
Speaker1	It’s part of your legacy.” When my mother made this comment, I presumed she meant the legacy of the picketing; it’s what we were known for, and what was getting us ever more attention in the press.
Speaker1	Later, though, when I heard her telling one of my siblings the same story, I realized the obvious: that if the picketing didn’t begin until after her sixth child was born, there must have been another part of this legacy.
Speaker1	What had it been?
Speaker1	“Oh, honey,” my mom said, “long before this city hated us for picketing, they hated us for defending the rights of black people.”
Speaker1	As the stories were told to me, my grandparents moved to Topeka with their young son in the spring of 1954, when the city was at the heart of a nationwide civil rights battle.
Speaker1	Their arrival coincided with the publication of the United States Supreme Court’s decision in the landmark case Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka.
Speaker1	The Court had ruled against the city, overturning the previous “separate but equal” standard and banning racial segregation in state-run schools, which Topeka had fought all the way to the highest court in the land in order to maintain.
Speaker1	Born in 1929, Gramps had grown up in Meridian, Mississippi, in the deep South—a place where first slavery and then segregation had had roots sunk deep.
Speaker1	“He saw the way those black people were treated,” my mother told me, “and by the mercy of God, he knew it was wrong.” She quoted to me and my siblings the same verses that her father had quoted to her and her siblings: One law shall be to him that is homeborn, and unto the stranger that sojourneth among you, because God hath made of one blood all nations of men for to dwell on all the face of the earth.
Speaker1	In the eyes of the law, all must be equal.
Speaker1	But the ministry brought my family to Topeka, not the civil rights movement.
Speaker1	In spite of his father’s best efforts to prepare him for a career in the military, my grandfather had become a preacher instead.
Speaker1	He grew up a quiet, studious child in a highly respected family, and was a high achiever.
Speaker1	He graduated high school at sixteen, sixth in his class, an Eagle Scout, Golden Gloves boxer, recipient of an American Legion Citizenship Award, class commencement speaker, and the best-drilled member of the Mississippi Junior State Guard.
Speaker1	His father worked hard to help him secure a principal appointment to the United States Military Academy at West Point, but because candidates must be at least seventeen years old, my grandfather had to wait several months before he would be able to matriculate.
Speaker1	During those months, he attended a tent revival meeting at a local Methodist church in Meridian and “got saved.” Gramps described that event as “a genuine religious experience” and “an unction or impulse on the heart,” referencing the verse that declares that ye have an unction from the Holy One, and ye know all things.
Speaker1	The sermon my grandfather heard that day was the parable of the wedding feast, in which Jesus likens the kingdom of heaven to a certain king who makes a feast for the marriage of his son, and sends his servants to bid the invitees to come: But they made light of it, and went their ways, one to his farm, another to his merchandise: And the remnant took his servants, and entreated them spitefully, and slew them.
Speaker1	But when the king heard thereof, he was wroth: and he sent forth his armies, and destroyed those murderers, and burned up their city.
Speaker1	The parable continues, but this part was frightfully compelling to my grandfather, the fate of the men who were bidden to the feast and the pitiful excuses they gave for their refusal to come—their work.
Speaker1	Their livelihood.
Speaker1	He would not be one of those wretched men to spurn Heaven itself, but one of the servants who would call the world to the feast.
Speaker1	All the dreams he and his father had shared, all the plans they’d made, all the work they’d done to get my grandfather into West Point became irrelevant in the face of God Himself calling my grandfather to become a preacher.
Speaker1	His father was furious, but Gramps’s decision was made.
Speaker1	Between his high school graduation in 1946 and the summer of 1951, my grandfather never seemed to stay in one place for very long, enrolling variously at Bob Jones University, the famed evangelical school then located in Cleveland, Tennessee; at Prairie Bible Institute in Three Hills, Alberta, Canada; and at John Muir College in Pasadena, California, where he earned an associate’s degree in engineering in 1951.