Speaker1	Still, I understood that Grace wasn’t perfect, and that my father was trying to help her to grow—to learn to discipline herself and her mind, and to see that necessary courses of action aren’t always fun or enjoyable.
Speaker1	Sometimes, you just had to do what you were told.
Speaker1	Bekah and I had learned these lessons when we were young, and our lives had become much more pleasant as a result.
Speaker1	In learning to conquer our wayward emotions, we had found peace, and I tried to encourage Grace to seek it, as well.
Speaker1	As much as I disagreed with so many of the elders’ decisions, I still believed that submitting to God meant submitting to church leaders, and I sent her quotes about the importance of training our hearts and minds to yield to them.
Speaker1	Just by virtue of their authority over us, I fell back into the position that they were right, that our doubts were wrong, and that any disagreements we had were the rebellious impulses of disobedient children.
Speaker1	How dare we think that we knew better than the leaders God had set over us?
Speaker1	I wanted to yield, and I chided myself for any thought that contradicted the church.
Speaker1	“I just don’t understand this, Mom!” She and I were in the kitchen getting things ready for dinner.
Speaker1	A month had passed since Lindsey’s call to my sister, and Grace and I hadn’t exchanged a word with her since.
Speaker1	I had asked repeatedly for permission to apologize, to explain that our sudden disappearance hadn’t been a choice to punish Lindsey for the understandable outrage she’d unleashed on my sister, but because the elders had decided it was best.
Speaker1	With increasing anger at my persistence, my father refused.
Speaker1	Echoing the other elders, he insisted that Lindsey deserved neither explanation nor apology: she was no concern of ours except inasmuch as she had an interest in the Bible and our doctrines.
Speaker1	“We’ve put Lindsey in an impossible situation!” I told my mother.
Speaker1	“We’ve almost completely cut off her interactions with church members because she isn’t baptized—but we’ve also told Justin that if he’s ruling well his own house, he’ll be keeping Lindsey from having relationships with friends or family outside the church, too!
Speaker1	She’s just supposed to stay at home all the time and only have her husband and toddler around?
Speaker1	Steve would never have accepted that kind of treatment if we’d done it to his wife when he first came here!”
Speaker1	My mother was quiet.
Speaker1	I could feel myself spinning out of control, despair and bile rising in my chest, but I couldn’t stop myself from continuing.
Speaker1	“What are we doing?
Speaker1	There is nothing Scriptural about what’s going on here!
Speaker1	The elders act as if their judgment is infallible and they refuse to listen to anyone else—even when they’re directly violating the commandments!
Speaker1	All the verses about being of one mind mean nothing to them!
Speaker1	The women are angry and spiteful and always finding reasons to be offended!” I was crying now, filled with a desperation so choking I could hardly breathe.
Speaker1	I quoted the verses I knew my mother already knew.
Speaker1	She’d turned to them often over the past year, trying to maintain hope that her situation would improve.
Speaker1	My heart twisted into a knot of despair knowing that the past year had been so much worse for her.
Speaker1	I was only a witness to the cruel treatment of the elders and other members.
Speaker1	She was their primary target.
Speaker1	By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to another.
Speaker1	In lowliness of mind let each esteem other better than themselves.
Speaker1	Put on therefore, as the elect of God, holy and beloved, bowels of mercies, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, longsuffering; Forbearing one another, and forgiving one another.
Speaker1	Mercy.
Speaker1	Humility.
Speaker1	Meekness.
Speaker1	Compassion.
Speaker1	Where were they among this church body?
Speaker1	Almost as soon as the thought formed in my mind, another took its place:
Speaker1	I sounded like C.G.
Speaker1	The Fourth of July arrived.
Speaker1	We’d stopped celebrating American Independence after the September 11 attacks—dispositive evidence that our nation was fully and finally doomed—but we still got the day off from work.
Speaker1	Grace and I had volunteered to spend some of ours painting the basement walls in the home of our friend Jayme, a new church member, so we changed into old clothes after the noontime pickets.
Speaker1	We headed out into the afternoon heat, across the street, down the path of stone steps that led through the shade of my aunt’s front yard and then my brother’s, and into the dark house that sat three doors west of ours.
Speaker1	The basement’s dim lighting felt especially depressing after the blinding sun outside.
Speaker1	We lined the floor by the walls with garbage bags, and I poured white paint into an empty cottage cheese carton that Grace held out to me.
Speaker1	Neither of us spoke.
Speaker1	I connected a portable speaker to my phone—the new album by Blind Pilot, another of C.G.’s recommendations—and pressed play.
Speaker1	Grace had misjudged again, and she’d received an ultimatum from the elders: one more wrong move and she would be excluded from the church.
Speaker1	This time, my sister’s crime had been failing to turn Justin in for reaching out to her.
Speaker1	He’d used Twitter to send her a private message asking how to fix the situation his family was in.
Speaker1	Justin and Lindsey seemed baffled by and resentful of the isolation that the church had imposed upon them—an obvious and entirely reasonable response, as I’d argued to my mother just days before.
Speaker1	Instead of reporting Justin’s message to the elders, Grace had sent a brief response explaining that she couldn’t talk to them, and to please just talk with our parents.
Speaker1	He’d followed up with an email, and Grace had called him to repeat the same message: Talk to my parents.
Speaker1	After a couple of guilt-filled days, she’d turned herself in.
Speaker1	The elders considered Grace’s actions depraved enough to warrant abridging the biblically mandated disciplinary process, jumping directly to the final step before exclusion.
Speaker1	And just as with our cousin, they’d made the decision without even meeting with the rest of the church.
Speaker1	I knew that Grace should have reported Justin without hesitation, the way the rest of us had learned to do—for they watch for your soul—but in answering her mistake with more clear violations of Scripture, the elders continued to abuse the authority of their office.
Speaker1	I had no idea if anyone else felt the same, because addressing grievances with other members—instead of one’s elder—was not permitted.
Speaker1	I stared intently at the basement wall as I moved the brush over the deep purple stripes we were meant to cover.
Speaker1	I watched the bristles leave their trails of white, but no matter how thickly I coated the brush or how many times I went over it—again and again and again—the darkness was still visible underneath.
Speaker1	My mind spun through its familiar circuits, the same objections and doubts that had been brewing for over a year, grasping for something that would return order to the chaos.
Speaker1	The futility of it all had been a heaviness in my mind for months, but it had taken on a physical dimension now, and it was suffocating—the dank chill of the basement and the shadows cast in the dim light and the impossible melancholy of the notes seeping out of the stereo.
Speaker1	The weight of my arm and of the paintbrush seemed to grow with each stroke until I could hardly bring myself to lift them.
Speaker1	An insurmountable burden.
Speaker1	I had never seen a member of my immediate family subjected to church discipline before, but it wasn’t special family ties that made the situation untenable.
Speaker1	It was the fact that for the first time in my life, the accused were people I lived with and knew most intimately.
Speaker1	I had direct, firsthand knowledge of their daily lives and habits, and I knew that the judgments leveled by the elders were wrong.
Speaker1	They were wrong about my mother.
Speaker1	They were wrong about my sister.
Speaker1	And I strongly suspected they’d been wrong about my cousin, too.
Speaker1	I could not acquiesce to their conclusions the way I’d done with so many others before.
Speaker1	I could no longer blindly trust the judgment of these men.
Speaker1	My arm continued to drag the paintbrush up and down, but my pulse and thoughts were racing.
Speaker1	By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to another.
Speaker1	I couldn’t believe how our love within the church had been warped beyond recognition by the elders’ unscriptural will to punish.
Speaker1	By their implacable demands for unquestioning obedience.
Speaker1	By their pernicious need for superiority and control.
Speaker1	They had developed a toxic sense of certainty in their own righteousness, seizing for themselves the role of the ultimate arbiter of divine truth—and they now seemed willing to lay waste to anyone who disagreed with them.
Speaker1	It was a heinous arrogance and sinfulness that could not be denied.
Speaker1	And in a moment of horrifying clarity, I finally saw what had eluded me for so long:
Speaker1	We had all been behaving in the exact same way toward outsiders.
Speaker1	It was as if we were finally doing to ourselves what we had been doing to others—for over twenty years.
Speaker1	My eyes widened and my face flushed hot, overtaken by panic and shame and regret and humiliation in the split second it took my mind to find a way to make sense of the chaos that the church had become:
Speaker1	What if we’re wrong?
Speaker1	What if this isn’t The Place led by God Himself?
Speaker1	What if we’re just people?
Speaker1	And I felt sure that it was all true.
Speaker1	I crossed a chasm in that split second, pursuing a thought my mind had never truly imagined and now could never take back.
Speaker1	With stark clarity I understood that whether the church was wrong or right, I was a monster.
Speaker1	If we were wrong, then I had spent every day of my life industriously sowing doom, discord, and rage to so many—not at the behest of God, but of my grandfather.
Speaker1	I had wasted my life only to fill others’ with pain and misery.
Speaker1	And if the church was right?
Speaker1	Then asking those questions and even beginning to consider their implications was an unforgivable betrayal of everyone I had ever loved and the ideals I’d dedicated my life to defending.
Speaker1	In my mind, I was a betrayer already.
Speaker1	I thought of my mother, and the guilt was crippling.
Speaker1	I didn’t deserve to be part of this body of believers.
Speaker1	The Lord was done with me—an Esau, after all.
Speaker1	Already condemned.
Speaker1	Overwhelmed by a sudden pressing need to leave that instant, every part of my body hummed with a single vicious accusation: You don’t belong.
Speaker1	My eyes squeezed shut, my whole face twisting instantly into desperate sobs that I tried to suffocate by cutting off the air to my lungs.
Speaker1	In the span of a few seconds, my world had disintegrated, slipping through my fingers like so much sand.
Speaker1	I turned to put the paintbrush down and go home to pack—there was nothing beyond packing—but I stopped short at the sight of my sister.
Speaker1	Her back was to me as she worked the paint, shoulders hunched and limbs moving as if through quicksand—a visible reminder that she had been trudging through the same quagmire of depression, confusion, and despair that I had.
Speaker1	How could I leave without explaining to her?
Speaker1	How could I ever explain this to her?
Speaker1	Still sobbing, I turned back to the wall, and dipped my brush in the paint again.
Speaker1	I was dizzy.
Speaker1	Needed to calm down.
Speaker1	Needed to think this through.
Speaker1	My mind reached for solid ground, a way to explain to myself and my sister why I was suddenly doubting the church itself—the only truth we’d ever known.
Speaker1	What did I know for sure?
Speaker1	The lying and Photoshopping were clearly wrong.
Speaker1	Lying lips are abomination to the Lord: but they that deal truly are his delight.
Speaker1	The prolonged isolation and lack of grace toward perceived offenders were clearly wrong.
Speaker1	Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are spiritual, restore such an one in the spirit of meekness.
Speaker1	Justin.
Speaker1	Lindsey.
Speaker1	Grace.
Speaker1	My mother.
Speaker1	My cousin.
Speaker1	These situations were egregious, ongoing, and the list kept growing.
Speaker1	The endless proliferation of extra-biblical rules.
Speaker1	Ye shall not add unto the word which I command you, neither shall ye diminish ought from it.
Speaker1	The exclusion of most church members from the decision-making process, and the inability to speak freely with non-elders.
Speaker1	Now I beseech you, brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the same thing, and that there be no divisions among you; but that ye be perfectly joined together in the same mind and in the same judgment.
Speaker1	My heart hammered, full of terror at the seditious thoughts taking hold in my mind—would God snuff me out this very moment?—but I was growing bolder.
Speaker1	I fought to stop myself from reverting to the mindset that had kept me from these questions all my life: certainty that the church was The Truth, and that I was a child, and that for me to challenge or contradict their established wisdom was nothing more than a tantrum.
Speaker1	I had to keep going.
Speaker1	I thought again of the arguments C.G.
Speaker1	had made about our lack of compassion, gentleness, humility.
Speaker1	How had I so easily dismissed him?
Speaker1	How could I have missed what had been staring me in the face for over a year?
Speaker1	And most important: If the church was wrong about all those things, what else were we wrong about?
Speaker1	The question felt like an iron key sliding into the lock of a long-sealed door.
Speaker1	I could almost hear it swinging open on hinges groaning with age, unleashing a surge of memories buried inside—as if they had been deliberately locked away so as to cause no disturbance.
Speaker1	They flashed through my mind one after another:
Speaker1	• A pointed Twitter exchange with a Jewish blogger called David Abitbol: I was defending Westboro’s call for the government to designate homosexuality a capital crime, in accordance with Levitical law—DEATH PENALTY FOR FAGS.
Speaker1	David was an Orthodox Jew, and surprised me by quoting Jesus: He that is without sin among you, let him first cast a stone at her.
Speaker1	I had seen this as a general call to humility, and I couldn’t believe I had never connected that Jesus was specifically arguing against the death penalty.
Speaker1	I was mortified.
Speaker1	When I approached my mother, she doubled down.
Speaker1	She repeated verses that seemed to support our position, but never answered what Jesus had said.
Speaker1	Her stridency took me aback, and I walked away shaken.
Speaker1	It was the first time I was consciously aware of inconsistency in our doctrine, but I was certain this sign was unscriptural.
Speaker1	I had quietly stopped holding it—and put an end to my arguments with David—but this was a relatively small point of theology.
Speaker1	I had set it aside, immediately and instinctively suppressing the memory.
Speaker1	• A conversation with my mother during a walk to an evening picket: Why did we have a sign declaring FAGS CAN’T REPENT?
Speaker1	Couldn’t God give repentance to anyone He chose?
Speaker1	Isn’t it misleading and dishonest to say otherwise?
Speaker1	Again, she seemed not to hear me, repeating the verses we used to justify the sign, but not addressing the contradictory verses I had quoted.
Speaker1	And again, I’d been afraid to pursue the objection—who did I think I was?—but I had stopped holding this sign, too.
Speaker1	• A Bible reading with my grandfather one summer afternoon: Gramps was making lunch in the church kitchen, and I’d walked in with some papers my mom had sent me across the block to deliver.
Speaker1	“What’s that Matthew 5 say about divorce, love bug?” he asked me, pointing to the collection of super-large-print Bibles and concordances always stacked on the counter.
Speaker1	I’d plucked one up and sat down and started to read to him, eventually coming to a perplexing phrase: pray for them which despitefully use you.
Speaker1	We had been earnestly praying for the destruction of our enemies for years by then—but if that was right for us to do, what did this verse mean?
Speaker1	My grandfather paused: “Well … it doesn’t say to pray for their good.” In the context of Jesus’s command to love your enemies, this argument made no sense.
Speaker1	When I asked my father about it that evening and told him what Gramps had said, my father skeptically confirmed what I’d known was true: “That’s clearly not what that means.
Speaker1	It does mean to pray for their good.” I was relieved to hear my father say so—but now that I’d resolved the immediate controversy in my thoughts, the contradiction flitted out of my mind like a butterfly, never to return again.
Speaker1	Why had I never pursued it?
Speaker1	And with that, the most powerful partition in my mind—the one that had kept me from seeing the most grievous contradiction of all—dissolved.
Speaker1	We had been claiming to love thy neighbor all my life.
Speaker1	We claimed we were the only ones who truly cared about anyone else.
Speaker1	“We’re the only ones that love these fags!” Gramps would say in his Mississippi drawl.
Speaker1	But at the same time, we had been wholly dedicated to antagonizing the world.
Speaker1	We mocked and delighted in their suffering.
Speaker1	We demanded they repent, and then asked God to preserve them in their sin.
Speaker1	We prayed for Him to destroy them.
Speaker1	Two diametrically opposed positions, held strongly and sincerely by the same mind at the same time—just never in the same moment.
Speaker1	A deceived heart hath turned him aside, that he cannot deliver his soul, nor say, Is there not a lie in my right hand?
Speaker1	I felt deranged.
Speaker1	I numbly moved the brush up and down the wall, hot tears still sliding down my cheeks.
Speaker1	My mind was finally settling on its inevitable conclusion: There was something terribly wrong at Westboro.
Speaker1	God was not in this place.
Speaker1	We were not special.
Speaker1	Not hand-selected by the Lord to do His divine work.
Speaker1	We were a deluded people.
Speaker1	As my thoughts slowed, I came back to the present, the melody of a new song drifting into my awareness.
Speaker1	It was gentle and somber and yearning, and it sounded like I would never be happy again.
Speaker1	Will I break and will I bow / if I cannot let it go?
Speaker1	At these lyrics, I began to sob in silence again.
Speaker1	I glanced back to see if my sister had noticed, but she was still blissfully unaware of my state.
Speaker1	Of the fact that we were living a delusion.
Speaker1	Even knowing how difficult things had become at Westboro, how could I drag her with me into this waking nightmare?
Speaker1	“When will these things change?” Grace had asked me after the ultimatum.
Speaker1	When would the grip of the elders slacken, their control over our every movement?
Speaker1	When could she say a simple “Hello” to Justin without the suspicion and wrath of the church falling on her?
Speaker1	When would our mother be treated with the compassion any church member deserved?
Speaker1	I’d told her what I always had: that the Lord was with us.
Speaker1	That everything would doubtless improve.
Speaker1	I composed long messages to encourage her to take heart and continue in Westboro’s way:
Speaker1	You must look on the great blessings you have been given, my sister.
Speaker1	You must rejoice in those gifts and not continue to sorrow.
Speaker1	You seemed to heartily agree with that recent line from Gramps’ sermon: “I think unthankfulness may be the most disgusting sin of all.” We don’t want to anger the Lord with unthankfulness—for gifts and for deliverance and for all we have.
Speaker1	Remember what the Lord said to Joshua.
Speaker1	Israel had trespassed against God and He cursed them in battle and Joshua mourned and prayed to God.
Speaker1	“And the Lord said unto Joshua, Get thee up: wherefore liest thou thus upon thy face?” Instead of mourning, we have to get after what the Lord has given us to do.
Speaker1	“Be not weary in well doing,” dear girl, and “cast not away your confidence, which hath great recompense of reward.”
Speaker1	In due season we will reap, if we faint not.
Speaker1	But the hope that inspired me to write those messages was now gone.
Speaker1	We couldn’t fix the problems in the church, because we no longer had a voice.
Speaker1	When we objected, we weren’t viewed as church members with legitimate concerns.
Speaker1	Instead, we were disobedient children.
Speaker1	I thought about the future, and there was nothing left.
Speaker1	If I could’ve known then we were dying to get gone …
Speaker1	I can’t believe we get just one.
Speaker1	What if we did only have one life, and not eternity?
Speaker1	How could we spend ours hurting people, picking fights with the entire world—not at the will of a Sovereign God, but for nothing?
Speaker1	How could I not talk to Grace?
Speaker1	I didn’t know what we would do with our lives instead, but I thought of my sister’s impossible dreams of exploring the world … and I suddenly realized that maybe the elders had been right about her.
Speaker1	Maybe Grace didn’t belong here, either.
Speaker1	Maybe she had already come to the same conclusion I just had, but was afraid to leave on her own.
Speaker1	Maybe she was afraid to tell me, because I had been such a zealous defender of the church for so long.
Speaker1	If so, her fear was not unfounded.
Speaker1	Our mother had taught us the same verses:
Speaker1	If thy brother, or thy son, or thy daughter, or the wife of thy bosom, or thy friend, which is as thine own soul, entice thee secretly, saying, Let us go and serve other gods … Thou shalt not consent unto him, nor hearken unto him; neither shall thine eye pity him, neither shalt thou conceal him: But thou shalt surely kill him; thine hand shall be first upon him to put him to death.
Speaker1	Our church wouldn’t be executing anyone, but the standard was clear: if your closest friend or family member came to you suggesting defiance of Westboro’s God, that person deserved to die—and you were responsible for turning them in.
Speaker1	Neither shalt thou conceal him.
Speaker1	But Grace hadn’t turned Justin in.
Speaker1	Maybe she wouldn’t turn me in.
Speaker1	I needed to think before I spoke to Grace.
Speaker1	Where would we go?
Speaker1	I forced myself to stop crying and let the logistical part of my brain kick in.
Speaker1	I immediately dismissed the idea of going to any ex-member of Westboro for help.
Speaker1	We kept close tabs on the few who ever spoke up publicly about their time in the church, and it was clear that those people were awful.
Speaker1	So many lies.
Speaker1	I thought a moment, and then went to pick up my phone.
Speaker1	I switched the ringer to silent so that the telltale trill wouldn’t sound over the speaker as I re-installed Words With Friends.
Speaker1	Grace came home on her lunch break the following day, and as had become our habit, I followed her up the stairs, down the hall, and around to my room in the corner of the house.
Speaker1	We hadn’t been eating much, and the heaviness of our silence had become habitual, too—particularly since the ultimatum.
Speaker1	My sister had never been anywhere without permission, never been given any freedom or independence of any kind, and now she was on the cusp of being thrust into the world on her own at nineteen, with almost no practical life skills—for texting.
Speaker1	We sat side by side on the edge of my bed, staring at the wall in silence for a minute, and then I started to cry.
Speaker1	I laid my head in her lap and sobbed for a few moments.
Speaker1	She cradled my head and slowly dragged her fingers across my scalp, trying to comfort me.
Speaker1	“Grace…”
Speaker1	I tried to compose myself, but the longer I waited, the harder I wept.
Speaker1	How was I even going to say this?
Speaker1	“… what if we weren’t here?”
Speaker1	I couldn’t bring myself to say What if we left?
Speaker1	aloud.
Speaker1	I couldn’t bring myself to make it real.
Speaker1	Her hand paused for a beat and then slowly continued its path through my curls.
Speaker1	“What do you mean?” she asked quietly.
Speaker1	What did I mean?
Speaker1	My body was racked with sobs, and I tried to control them long enough to get the words out.
Speaker1	“What if we were somewhere else?” Slowly, slowly.
Speaker1	I don’t remember any words after that.
Speaker1	Only an eruption of despair.
Speaker1	I tried to explain what had happened the day before in the basement, my terrifying realizations about the church, but what came out was almost entirely incoherent.
Speaker1	I couldn’t settle on any one idea long enough to articulate it, because I was overcome by a hysteria the likes of which I had never known.
Speaker1	That familiar fear always just beneath the surface—the little voice accusing that in spite of everything, I really was a reprobate—had amplified a thousandfold.
Speaker1	I knew logically that I couldn’t escape the wrath of an omnipresent God, but the sense of His imminent judgment had kindled a fire in me, a desperate urgency to get out.
Speaker1	I wanted to jump out of my skin.
Speaker1	There was no way to consider the magnitude of the devastation that I would soon be forever cut off from everyone I had ever loved: my faculties simply shut down before I could even approach that reality.
Speaker1	I was betraying my beloved mother—treated unconscionably by the church body and then abandoned by her own daughter.
Speaker1	How could I leave her?
Speaker1	Monstrous.
Speaker1	And all the while, Grace held my head in her lap, running her nails through my hair, periodically asking questions in a low, cautious voice.
Speaker1	Distrustful.
Speaker1	Why now?
Speaker1	What has changed?
Speaker1	Where would we go?
Speaker1	I had no other ideas, so I mentioned C.G.
Speaker1	Maybe he would help us.
Speaker1	I didn’t tell Grace that I’d spoken with him already, partly because both she and he were behaving as though they were afraid of me.
Speaker1	As if they didn’t know me.
Speaker1	Their reactions were crushing, because they confirmed what I already believed: that outside of Westboro, I was nothing.
Speaker1	Within the church, I was a cherished daughter—I wielded no power, but my skills were many and useful and valued.
Speaker1	I was dependable, and trustworthy, and called upon frequently.
Speaker1	I had built my life and identity around the church, and I was well-beloved.
Speaker1	Who was I on the outside?
Speaker1	I was the perpetrator of untold amounts of harm in the world.
Speaker1	I was a lover of tragedy, cruelly attacking the grieving at their most vulnerable.
Speaker1	I was a willing participant in the most aggressive anti-gay picketing campaign the country had ever seen.
Speaker1	What reason did anyone have to give me a second chance?
Speaker1	Grace and C.G.
Speaker1	had seen some of the very best parts of me.
Speaker1	If even they thought me unhinged, there was no hope for me on the outside.
Speaker1	No one would ever understand.
Speaker1	All was lost.
