Speaker1	Chapter nine.
Speaker1	Lift Up Thy Voice
Speaker1	Head Full of Doubt / Road Full of Promise
Speaker1	“There’s no fresh start in today’s world.
Speaker1	Any twelve-year-old with a cell phone could find out what you did.
Speaker1	Everything we do is collated and quantified.
Speaker1	Everything sticks.”
Speaker1	Don’t act surprised that I’m quoting Batman.
Speaker1	At WBC, reciting lines from pop culture is par for the course.
Speaker1	And why not?
Speaker1	The sentiments they express are readily identifiable by the masses—and shifting their meaning is as easy as giving them new context.
Speaker1	So put Selina Kyle’s words in a different framework:
Speaker1	In a city in a state in the center of a country lives a group of people who believe they are the center of the universe; they know Right and Wrong, and they are Right.
Speaker1	They work hard and go to school and get married and have kids who they take to church and teach that continually protesting the lives, deaths, and daily activities of The World is the only genuine statement of compassion that a God-loving human can sincerely make.
Speaker1	As parents, they are attentive and engaged, and the children learn their lessons well.
Speaker1	This is my framework.
Speaker1	Until very recently, this is what I lived, breathed, studied, believed, preached—loudly, daily, and for nearly 27 years.
Speaker1	I never thought it would change.
Speaker1	I never wanted it to.
Speaker1	Then suddenly: it did.
Speaker1	And I left.
Speaker1	Where do you go from there?
Speaker1	I don’t know, exactly.
Speaker1	My sister Grace is with me, though.
Speaker1	We’re trying to figure it out together.
Speaker1	There are some things we do know.
Speaker1	We know that we’ve done and said things that hurt people.
Speaker1	Inflicting pain on others wasn’t the goal, but it was one of the outcomes.
Speaker1	We wish it weren’t so, and regret that hurt.
Speaker1	We know that we dearly love our family.
Speaker1	They now consider us betrayers, and we are cut off from their lives, but we know they are well-intentioned.
Speaker1	We will never not love them.
Speaker1	We know that we can’t undo our whole lives.
Speaker1	We can’t even say we’d want to if we could; we are who we are because of all the experiences that brought us to this point.
Speaker1	What we can do is try to find a better way to live from here on.
Speaker1	That’s our focus.
Speaker1	Up until now, our names have been synonymous with “God Hates Fags.” Any twelve-year-old with a cell phone could find out what we did.
Speaker1	We hope Ms. Kyle was right about the other part, too, though—that everything sticks—and that the changes we make in our lives will speak for themselves.
Speaker1	Megan and Grace
Speaker1	February 6, 2013
Speaker1	As I flew back to Rapid City from New York, my eyes traced the final version of the “statement” again and again, until I was on the verge of vomiting.
Speaker1	I knew that the only people who might care about these paragraphs were my family and a handful of curious Twitter followers, but I was still terrified of how they would be received.
Speaker1	Public apologies in the age of social media could be brutal, every word parsed to ensure that no unacceptable sentiment remained in the offending party—and anything less than full repudiation of one’s “sins” would exacerbate the public flogging.
Speaker1	Twitter mobs could tear a person’s reputation to shreds, demanding that they lose their job over an errant tweet or a joke that didn’t land—transgressions that were far less egregious than the dedicated campaign of condemnation in which I had been a willing participant for many years.
Speaker1	My apology was not a blanket condemnation of Westboro, a desperate plea for forgiveness, or a complete recanting of all my previous words and deeds.
Speaker1	As I’d stood weeping and packing the day I left the church, Jael had insisted that these were my only options—that the world would make my life a living Hell otherwise.
Speaker1	But even though they might have seemed like better strategies, I could not bring myself to employ them.
Speaker1	This apology would not be for show.
Speaker1	I would not begin this new life guided by expedience over truth.
Speaker1	Regardless of the response, I could only be honest and hope for the best.
Speaker1	I had put agonizing thought into writing the words that would be published the following morning, to be sure they conveyed exactly what I felt, meant, and believed in that moment.
Speaker1	It seemed to me that part of the enormous disconnection between Westboro and the rest of the world resulted from how we communicated.
Speaker1	We had long invited confusion and hostility with language and methods that were deliberately grievous, provocative, and recondite.
Speaker1	“Westboro is responsible for their own PR,” a friend told me one day, articulating a sentiment I had found so frustrating after I joined Twitter: that the church’s refusal to consider how our words and actions would be construed by our targets had caused much unnecessary pain for everyone involved.
Speaker1	Why were we endlessly translating our signs and behaviors so that outsiders could understand them?
Speaker1	Why didn’t we just begin our efforts by speaking with clarity, gentleness, reasonableness?
Speaker1	Except ye utter by the tongue words easy to be understood, how shall it be known what is spoken?
Speaker1	for ye shall speak into the air.
Speaker1	Honesty and good intentions weren’t worth much, I decided, if they were lost in translation.
Speaker1	To ensure that mine wouldn’t be, I had turned to a group of family members and new friends.
Speaker1	In the multitude of counsellers there is safety.
Speaker1	Among these were two writers I had met while they’d been visiting Westboro for research, and with whom I had maintained friendly communication via Twitter after their departures.
Speaker1	Daniel Shannon and Jeff Chu were both incredibly kind, both gay, and both living in New York.
Speaker1	I spoke with them by phone from the inn’s living room, but by chance, I had the opportunity to visit them in person—another occasion to push back at the Us/Them divide.
Speaker1	As one of very few ex-members of Westboro who had chosen to be open about her experiences, my cousin Libby had been invited to New York to be interviewed on the Today Show and Anderson Cooper’s Anderson Live at the end of January.
Speaker1	She asked me to accompany her for moral support, but when the producers pressed me to join her for the interviews, I insisted that it was impossible.
Speaker1	I could not imagine standing in front of an audience—not now, not ever.
Speaker1	Away from the studios, I arranged for us to meet Daniel for dinner in Manhattan, and then Jeff and his husband, Tristan, for coffee in Brooklyn the following morning.
Speaker1	We spoke of Daniel’s atheism and Jeff’s Christianity, and how strange it all felt, this transition from picketing gays in Topeka to brunching together in New York.
Speaker1	Like so much of this new world, it was head-spinning.
Speaker1	Watching Jeff and Tristan interact in the warm light of the diner, I was surprised to realize that I had no bad feelings about their relationship.
Speaker1	They reminded me a bit of my parents, teasing and doting on each other.
Speaker1	“Jeffy,” Tristan called him.
Speaker1	The situation felt awkward only because it was new and foreign, and the only trace of negativity in me was a sense of betrayal: that my mother would be disappointed to know that I no longer felt that disgust she’d been describing to reporters all my life.
Speaker1	“When you think of these fags, there’s something that just rises up inside you and says”—and here she would bellow—“yuck!
Speaker1	You all know it!” But I felt no such thing—and I doubted she would have if not for her own upbringing.
Speaker1	When I shared my epiphany about interpretation with Jeff, he said, “That’s one thing I have never understood about your family.
Speaker1	They’re all lawyers, right?
Speaker1	The U.S. Constitution was written some two hundred years ago in essentially modern English, and there’s so much disagreement about how the U.S. Supreme Court should interpret and apply those words today.
Speaker1	The Bible was written thousands of years ago in languages no one speaks anymore … and somehow, Westboro alone has figured out its one true meaning?” Articulated that way, the arrogance of our position seemed even more incomprehensible.
Speaker1	In court, Margie’s job was to present and defend her interpretation of the facts and the law before a judge, who would hear all sides before making a final decision, which was subject to review by higher courts.
Speaker1	But when it came to the purported Word of God, in all its complexity, we considered our judgment to be so reliable as to merit absolute confidence, so unquestionable that we could insist that all of humankind follow it.
Speaker1	I shook my head and inwardly cringed.
Speaker1	Coming face-to-face with my arrogance, aggressive in its misplaced certainty, was a special sort of shame.
Speaker1	When my flight landed in Rapid City, I picked up some essentials at Walmart—peanut butter, chocolate, apples, and English muffins—and then pointed my car to Deadwood, my little sister, and our new friends.
Speaker1	Laura had convinced us to audition for a play at the local theater, and so—less than twenty-four hours before our scheduled return to Kansas in mid-January—Grace had agreed to stay in South Dakota.
Speaker1	The spring semester had been set to begin the very next day, and we had scrambled to remove her from all of her Topeka classes, exchanging them for online coursework that would allow us some distance from Westboro.
Speaker1	I would interview for a job working with Dustin at TDG—as a public relations assistant, ironically, not so different from work I’d done for Westboro—and Grace and I would stay in Deadwood at least until the play’s final performance.
Speaker1	I was elated, and the promise I received from Chad made me feel all the more hopeful.
Speaker1	CHAD: You’ll be back in SD.
Speaker1	I’ll figure out the math and approach the chalkboard.
Speaker1	I promise.
Speaker1	After unloading the groceries, I found Grace in the attic and told her the plan: the statement would go up the following morning on a new blogging platform called Medium, along with a short article Jeff had written while I was in New York.
Speaker1	“Your statement actually creates more questions than it answers,” he had told me.
Speaker1	“If you don’t explain a bit more about why you left, it will leave people to speculate and fill in the blanks on their own.”
Speaker1	I watched as my sister read over both documents.
Speaker1	She seemed so calm about it all.
Speaker1	Poised.
Speaker1	Graceful, I thought, and laughed out loud.
Speaker1	Grace looked up.
Speaker1	Something in her expression reminded me of the years before she started kindergarten, tooling around in a black romper covered in red flowers, a look of knowing defiance that seemed incongruous on a face so young.
Speaker1	A spark of fearlessness.
Speaker1	Her bright hazel eyes narrowed slightly, and she nodded.
Speaker1	“Yeah?” I asked.
Speaker1	“Let’s do this.”
Speaker1	CHAD: I’m just happy for you today.
Speaker1	I’m sure it’s a weight lifted.
Speaker1	If it’s not, it should be.
Speaker1	Recognize it thusly.
Speaker1	MEGAN: It is.
Speaker1	I have a hard time believing nice things people say anyway, so on this scale, it’s all just unbelievable.
Speaker1	Both in tone and in magnitude, the response to what Jeff and I had posted was nothing like I had expected.
Speaker1	Messages of encouragement and well-wishing flooded my Twitter account, and I was floored by how rare were the people who chose to denounce Grace and me.
Speaker1	To tell us that we could never be forgiven.
Speaker1	People from across the country and all over the world offered my sister and me friendship, places to sleep, and invitations to church by the hundreds.
Speaker1	Dozens of newspapers and blogs around the world picked up the story, and even Gawker—notorious for its lack of scruples—had kind things to say.
Speaker1	… good for them for escaping what is essentially a cult and defying its wrath by going public about it.
Speaker1	As far as the deprogramming process goes, Megan says, “I don’t know what I believe,” but she claims that she wants to determine how she can be “an influence for good.” And she has the rest of her life to atone.
Speaker1	Happy coming out day, girls.
Speaker1	Particularly moving were the messages from those with whom I had sparred on Twitter over the years—people I had come to know and like, people who had seen me regularly sling around condescension, condemnation, and words like “fag” and “whore.” Chad Darnell was one such person, a gay man living in Los Angeles.
Speaker1	Our exchanges had been full of Bible verses, friendly sarcasm, and sincerity—but as with all outsiders, I had been suspicious of his kindness and concern.
Speaker1	His response to my post about leaving Westboro was an open letter, which read in part:
Speaker1	Dear Megan:
Speaker1	Hey, girl, hey.
Speaker1	When I woke up to messages from family and friends that you had left the church, I literally burst into tears.
Speaker1	I sat in bed for 20 minutes reading your letter with ugly tears (like bad Oprah crying) streaming down my face and I couldn’t stop.
Speaker1	I am so proud of you.
Speaker1	I am so happy for you.
Speaker1	I (we) never felt hate in our hearts toward YOU.
Speaker1	Sure, we didn’t like you that much, but the action of you physically removing yourself from that situation is a strength that most humans will never know.
Speaker1	That was your family and your main source of interaction with people.
Speaker1	We get it.
Speaker1	Trust me, we ALL get it.
Speaker1	Megan, it would be the great honor of my church, my people to have you as a guest.
Speaker1	We just want you to come and breathe and feel what a community trying to make the world a better place should be.
Speaker1	We feel a special bond to you after all your tweeting over the years.
Speaker1	And know that we all, everyone at our church, forgive you.
Speaker1	And we wish you support and kindness and love.
Speaker1	Love,
Speaker1	Chad (and everyone at Hollywood United Methodist Church)
Speaker1	With each new kindness, I understood with ever greater clarity the depths of my ignorance about the world.
Speaker1	Clearly, the people writing these words were not the demons I had been warned about.
Speaker1	They didn’t hate Grace and me, and they didn’t expect us to hate our family.
Speaker1	They understood that the same people who taught us to curse Westboro’s enemies were the ones who had kissed our cheeks and tucked us in at night.
Speaker1	Though we had shown these people hostility and contempt in their most vulnerable moments, they extended generosity and compassion to us in ours.
Speaker1	They empathized with us in our pain and wanted good things for our future.
Speaker1	Dustin and Laura, Newbery and C.G., Cora the bartender and Ryan the dealer—I had seen them as exceptions, but it was starting to occur to me that there might be a lot more goodness in the world than I had believed.
Speaker1	I’d been so sure that it was filled with hateful, selfish, vindictive people, and I had never found so much hope in being proved wrong.
Speaker1	For their part, Westboro members responded exactly as I expected—which didn’t stop my heart from racing or my insides from twisting in anguish.
Speaker1	It was everything they had said about ex-members before, but I couldn’t grasp that they were saying such things about me.
Speaker1	How could they?
Speaker1	Knowing everything that had happened, how could my parents?
Speaker1	The church issued a statement with one assumption at its heart: that the church was blameless in the departure of any member, because there could be no legitimate reason to leave Westboro.
Speaker1	I read the words of an elder in several newspapers with growing bitterness, the same self-serving position we had always assumed when church members departed.
Speaker1	“She just decided that she didn’t want to obey God,” Steve said.
Speaker1	“They wanted to serve themselves.” Years would pass and the lies would continue unabated.
Speaker1	Steve seemed to have no compunction about publicly denying every fact that revealed the church as flawed, hypocritical.
Speaker1	He denied the takeover by the elders, the petty backbiting among church members, the merciless shunning of my mother.
Speaker1	He pretended their cruel treatment of her—removing my mother from the work she had done for decades as a way of shaming and isolating her—wasn’t punishment but kindness.
Speaker1	“We lifted her burden,” he said.
Speaker1	It was an especially embittering fabrication because it was exactly what they should have done—what I’d wished so often that they had done.
Speaker1	And then, amid the deluge of words, this paragraph:
Speaker1	Shirley Phelps-Roper, the mother of the sisters, is doing OK in the wake of her daughters leaving the church, Drain said.
Speaker1	On Wednesday, she was at a local facility welcoming the birth that morning of a grandson, Jason Brent.
Speaker1	Jason Brent.
Speaker1	Sam’s son.
Speaker1	A nephew I might never know.
Speaker1	Sitting on the green couch by the inn’s living room window, I watched a whitetail deer cross Lincoln Avenue and disappear around the side of the house.
Speaker1	My efforts at remaining calm were proving unsuccessful, and I sobbed tears of desperation—not because outsiders might believe Steve’s dissembling, but because church members would.
Speaker1	Just as I had done with Nate and Josh and Libby, they would accept these narratives about Grace and me.
Speaker1	We would be painted as evil, and they would be disposed to listen.
Speaker1	I had tried to preempt this process back at home, to thwart it in as many ways as I could, even turning my final tweet as a Westboro member into a message to my sister Bekah.
Speaker1	An angry person on Twitter had told her that “nobody loves you,” and she had retorted, “That’s not true!
Speaker1	@MeganPhelps loves me.
Speaker1	;)” My response remained there for months, and I had refused to post anything else afterward.
Speaker1	It was a reference to a line from a movie we had watched together, delivered forcefully by Jack Nicholson—a standing reminder to her in my absence.
Speaker1	“You’re goddamn right I do!”—A Few Good Men
Speaker1	They had to do it, though.
Speaker1	Demonizing Grace and me was the only way to protect their image of Westboro as not just benign but wholly good.
Speaker1	They couldn’t allow themselves to truly contemplate the idea that Westboro might be wrong about the ideals to which they had dedicated their lives.
Speaker1	They needed to believe in the righteousness of their cause just as much as we needed them to see its destructiveness.
Speaker1	What were they telling my siblings right now?