Speaker1	Understanding this, my father continued working his way through school—next up, an MBA program—and, almost out of thin air, created for himself a second career as an author writing textbooks about legal software and law office management.
Speaker1	Meanwhile, my mother managed the Phelps law firm and cared for our growing family.
Speaker1	Her role in the church was ever-expanding, as well.
Speaker1	She gave interviews to reporters, organized cross-country picket trips and the scheduling for the whole congregation: the daily pickets in Topeka, the mowing, the daycare, the weekly church cleanings, the monthly birthday parties—her contributions were without end.
Speaker1	The dynamics of my parents’ marriage never fit with the paradigm commonly associated with conservative Christianity: that of an authoritarian father dictating to a mealy-mouthed mother who just needed to stay in her place and recognize that her husband always knew better.
Speaker1	Wifely subjection was certainly in the Bible, but in practice, my parents operated as a team.
Speaker1	My father couldn’t have been further from authoritarian—gentle, intelligent, hard-working, so respectful of my mother’s thoughts, and so undeniably in love with her—and my mother couldn’t have been further from mealy-mouthed.
Speaker1	My father never weaponized his husband status to demand my mother’s silence or obedience, and their mutual respect was an example for all.
Speaker1	My parents had each found a perfect counterpart in the other, and even Gramps—who hadn’t wanted to believe anyone could be worthy of my mother—was impressed.
Speaker1	By the time my dad finished law school, there were three of us kids: my two older brothers, Sam and Josh, and then me.
Speaker1	Over the next sixteen years, eight more children would be born into the Phelps-Roper household.
Speaker1	It took me several years to stop shaking my head in bewilderment each time someone would ask “Are you Catholic?” upon learning that I was one of six, seven, eight, nine children.
Speaker1	Birth control wasn’t something I realized was even possible, let alone widely practiced.
Speaker1	I just knew the verses.
Speaker1	Lo, children are an heritage of the Lord: and the fruit of the womb is his reward.
Speaker1	“The womb business is God’s business,” Mom summarized.
Speaker1	“You can’t outsmart the Lord!”
Speaker1	The Catholic stance against artificial contraception was a relatively fringe position, but—in a pattern that would extend to virtually every aspect of our lives—Westboro Baptist Church was prepared to take it even further, to the letter of the Scriptures as we understood them.
Speaker1	And when the Lord saw that Leah was hated, he opened her womb: but Rachel was barren.
Speaker1	It was for God alone to give or withhold children, and even the “natural family planning” endorsed by Catholics was unacceptable.
Speaker1	The single time I heard about an aunt of mine attempting to defy God and “counting the days” to avoid pregnancy, it was in the context of her miscounting.
Speaker1	She and her husband had been struggling to provide for the six children they had already, but when she’d tried to take matters into her own hands, she’d ended up pregnant with twins.
Speaker1	God was teaching her a lesson, my mother said, because my aunt had failed to trust Him.
Speaker1	It wasn’t for her to decide when or how many children to have, it wasn’t for her to have any feeling or opinion on the matter at all, except to be grateful to the Lord for each one.
Speaker1	And oh, was my mama grateful.
Speaker1	I remember feeling it most in the music, when she would sing to us, always singing.
Speaker1	Before I turned five and had to join in with the rank and file for Saturday morning cleaning marathons, my little sister Bekah and I would dance on matching window seats in the living room, mouthing along as Christopher Cross or Fleetwood Mac blared from the big stereo while the others cleaned.
Speaker1	Dad would pick us up and twirl us around, and Mom would sashay over with a dusting rag in one hand and a can of Pledge in the other—that sickly sweet scent of chemical lemons filtering through the whole house—and she’d lean in to kiss our cheeks, serenading us at the top of her voice: “No, I will never be the same without your love / I’ll live alone, try so hard to rise above.” This was the same era in which I sat just to her left during church, when she belted out the hymns so high and so loud that it hurt my ears.
Speaker1	I discovered that to protect myself from the sonic onslaught, I could stick a finger into my left ear, press myself into my mother’s side, and listen to her sing from inside her body.
Speaker1	It was so soothing, the warmth and the vibrations and the feeling of her arm holding me close as I tucked into her.
Speaker1	I didn’t know then that this special place at her side would always be mine.
Speaker1	That as her eldest daughter, I would become to her what she had become to her father—and as that relationship had defined my mother, so this one would define me.
Speaker1	For I was tender and only beloved in the sight of my mother.
Speaker1	Samuel.
Speaker1	Joshua.
Speaker1	Megan.
Speaker1	Rebekah.
Speaker1	Isaiah.
Speaker1	Zacharias.
Speaker1	Grace.
Speaker1	Gabriel.
Speaker1	Jonah.
Speaker1	Noah.
Speaker1	Luke.
Speaker1	Sam.
Speaker1	Josh.
Speaker1	Meg.
Speaker1	Bek.
Speaker1	Zay.
Speaker1	Zach.
Speaker1	Grace.
Speaker1	Gabe.
Speaker1	Jonah.
Speaker1	Noah.
Speaker1	Luke.
Speaker1	SamJoshMegBekZayZachGraceGabeJonahNoahLuke.
Speaker1	It would be entirely reasonable to expect that my mother’s dedication to doing it all might wane with the birth of each additional child, that it would be impossible for her to maintain that commitment to having her children, her legal career, and her work for our church.
Speaker1	Instead, the opposite was true.
Speaker1	As our family swelled with each passing year, so, too, did the church’s profile and the added pressure we all faced as a result.
Speaker1	I’ve never known another woman who could have stood up under the strain of the burden my mother carried, not without collapsing under the weight of it.
Speaker1	She had an inexhaustible supply of strength, tenacity, and resourcefulness—whose origins, it seemed to me, must surely have been divine.
Speaker1	Soon after our initial protests at Gage Park, our war with the city of Topeka began to escalate.
Speaker1	Every anti-Westboro effort they made only served to strengthen our resolve, and we answered each one by dramatically expanding the pace and variety of our pickets.
Speaker1	Nearly two years in, we now targeted the newspaper (which regularly editorialized against us), the police department (which failed to protect us from the violent criminals who frequently came out to attack and threaten us), the city government (which worked to draft anti-picketing ordinances), many local churches (which joined the counterprotests against us), and any location related to any person who made any public statement against us or for gays.
Speaker1	Even our language had intensified.
Speaker1	The word gay had disappeared entirely from our signs and vocabulary—a misnomer, Gramps said—and it was replaced by fag, a word that literally signified a bundle of sticks used for kindling.
Speaker1	“Fag is an elegant metaphor!” Gramps insisted.
Speaker1	“In the same way a literal fag is used to kindle the fires of nature, these metaphorical fags fuel the flames of Hell and the fires of God’s wrath!” Of course, fag also had the added benefit of being scandalous and offensive, which only garnered more attention for our message.
Speaker1	One of the verses that Gramps quoted often included a command from God to shew my people their transgression—and as with the rest of the Bible, my grandfather took this literally.
Speaker1	For my cousins and me, this resulted in a precocious knowledge of gay sex practices, at least insofar as they were presented by our pastor.
Speaker1	Revulsion filled his voice as he spoke of gay people “anally copulating their brains out,” and “suckin’ around on each other, lickin’ around on each other.” He started adding stick figure depictions of anal sex to our picket signs, one man bent over in front of another.
Speaker1	I could articulate the meanings of “scat,” “rimming,” and “golden showers” all before my eighth birthday, though I was loath to do so.
Speaker1	To publicly accuse gays of these filthy behaviors would leave a girl open to challenge—“How do you know?”—and thus put her in the unenviable position of having to explain that it’s in a book called The Joys of Gay Sex … which, no, she had not read … but her grandfather had told her about it … during church … from the pulpit.
Speaker1	“Golden showers” was a term featured in our parody of The Twelve Days of Christmas.
Speaker1	On December evenings, I’d don my colorful winter coat, pick up a sign, and belt out the lyrics with gusto alongside my uncles and cousins, illuminated by streetlights or the glow of the marquee announcing The Nutcracker at the Topeka Performing Arts Center: “Five golden showers!
Speaker1	Preparation H, three bloody rectums, two shaven gerbils, and a vat of K-Y Jelly!” I knew even then that this was transgressive, but there was something so delightful about it, so appealing: this sense that my family had some secret knowledge about the world, that we were not subject to its rules or its judgments.
Speaker1	There might be an overabundance of regulations governing life within our own community, but the social niceties of the broader world held no sway over us in the context of the protests.
Speaker1	In that respect, we were a law unto ourselves, and all bets were off as long as our words were justified by the Bible.
Speaker1	Truth was an absolute defense against any and all claims made against us.
Speaker1	Unfortunately for us, it was not always an adequate defense.
Speaker1	One evening when I was seven, as my siblings and I cleaned up after dinner, there was the wail of a police siren, growing loud as it passed near our house and then fading.
Speaker1	And then there was another.
Speaker1	And another.
Speaker1	My mother frowned.
Speaker1	Our house sat just a block east of Gage Boulevard, one of the city’s main thoroughfares, so sirens weren’t especially unusual.
Speaker1	For some reason, these ones were making her uneasy.
Speaker1	“Maybe it’s our guys at the Vintage…”
Speaker1	The Vintage was a little restaurant advertising “Cocktails” and “Fine Foods” at the east end of a run-down shopping center just a few blocks from our house—targeted by Westboro because one of the managers was a lesbian serving on the Mayor’s Gay and Lesbian Task Force.
Speaker1	I had desperately wanted to picket the Vintage that Friday night, because my cousin Jael had told me she would be there.
Speaker1	She was one of my best friends, but since we now attended different elementary schools and lived on different blocks, the most regular time I had with her was when we were protesting.
Speaker1	Jael and I had this great routine whereby we’d grab a sign from the truck—her favorite was FAG GOD = RECTUM while I preferred FAG = AIDS with the skull and crossbones underneath—and then we’d plant ourselves somewhere on the picket line and chat it up for half an hour.
Speaker1	She’d bring those little patriotic-looking packages of Bazooka Bubble Gum, and we’d chomp noisily while I taught her the lyrics to songs I’d learned from my big brother Sam (“Baby Got Back,” “Santeria,” etc.
Speaker1	).
Speaker1	At the sound of the third siren, my mother’s anxiety shifted to alarm and we took off in the family van.
Speaker1	The scene in front of the Vintage was chaos, the small parking lot filled with curious bystanders, half a dozen patrol cars with red and blue flashing lights, EMTs, and cops taking statements from my aunts and uncles, and from mean-looking men in sweats.
Speaker1	We’d been attacked again, I saw, but worse than usual.
Speaker1	Dad and I stayed in the van while Mom jumped out to help.
Speaker1	She picked up a sign lying askew on the ground, which I sounded out—ABSTINENCE NOT CONDOMS—but didn’t understand.
Speaker1	Here, my memory of staring out the van window gets fuzzy, fusing with images I got from photographs and home videos later: my uncle Tim, neck braced and nose bleeding, being treated by EMTs on the running board of a big red fire engine; my skinny cousin Ben, seventeen years old, strapped onto a gurney with a series of black belts, a white brace around his neck and a white strap across his forehead, his left hand outstretched to hold on to our aunt Margie.
Speaker1	As Ben was being wheeled away, Margie seemed beside herself with outrage and grief.
Speaker1	“Never, Jerry!” she bellowed across the parking lot.
Speaker1	“Never.
Speaker1	We’re never—gonna—stop—picketing!”
Speaker1	Sitting at our family Bible reading the next day, my mother explained it all.
Speaker1	Jerry Berger, “the Jew lawyer” who owned the Vintage—the same guy we’d later see in a photo with his hands around my uncle’s neck, choking him unconscious—had hired a dozen bouncers from his strip club to come and beat us up for picketing his restaurant.
Speaker1	A local priest had witnessed the attack from the bank next door, and wrote a letter to the mayor: “The attackers walked with deliberate speed and apparent determination toward the picketers.
Speaker1	Then I saw the signs falling like sunflowers being cut down by cornknifes and bodies being knocked down and into Gage Boulevard.” Eight of our people were taken to the hospital that night.
Speaker1	Three were teenagers.
Speaker1	As tensions with the city continued to mount in the months following what Gramps called “The Vintage Massacre,” my mother helped me piece everything together.
Speaker1	She liked for pickets to do double duty as preaching and exercise, so I’d listen to her stories as we walked the picket line from end to end.
Speaker1	There was a new prosecutor in our county, my mom told me, a woman who had campaigned on the promise that she would get us off the streets.
Speaker1	We were bad for the city, bad for its image, bad for commerce, bad for children, and she represented a community that was as determined to shut us up as we were to be heard.
Speaker1	Ever since this woman had taken office as district attorney, my mother explained, she was doing everything in her power to stop us.
Speaker1	It was her encouragement that had the cops arresting us so often now, it was she who charged us with crimes we hadn’t committed.
Speaker1	And now people were attacking us more frequently because of her refusal to file charges when we were victims, like at the Vintage.
Speaker1	The prosecutor had gotten search warrants so that sheriff’s deputies could beat down the church doors with battering rams and confiscate our property—even though we hadn’t done anything wrong and the officers had had to give it all back.
Speaker1	They raided the law office, as well, even though the vast majority of Phelps-Chartered’s work involved representing individual members of the public—criminal cases, personal injury, family law—and had nothing to do with Westboro.
Speaker1	No matter how careful we were to follow the law, the DA could have us arrested, and Mom would have to run downtown and bail our loved ones out of jail again.
Speaker1	The attacks at Topeka protests and the vandalism of our homes grew worse during the term of that prosecutor.
Speaker1	I woke up one summer morning and followed my mom into the backyard we shared with the church, only to find that it had been torn apart.
Speaker1	There was patio furniture at the bottom of the pool, the seat cushions slashed open and strewn across the yard.
Speaker1	The weights my uncle used to benchpress had been dropped and broken into heavy chunks.
Speaker1	All of our garden hoses had been sliced open, and a huge gash in our beloved trampoline had rendered it worthless.
Speaker1	As a kid, I was most frightened by the lacerated state of the trampoline; anyone who could do harm to such a beautiful object clearly would not hesitate to turn the knife on a person.
Speaker1	Later on, someone did take a knife to my cousin’s tiny Westie, nearly beheading the poor creature for being on the wrong picketer’s property at the wrong time.
Speaker1	Little April managed to pull through, but we took this as just another in a long line of violent criminal attacks we faced for lawfully standing on public sidewalks to preach the standards of God.
Speaker1	Persecution in the purest sense of the word.
