Speaker1	Laura’s predicament sounded uncannily like my father’s, and I was surprised by how many similarities there were between the doctrines of Westboro and the Witnesses—but right then, staring out the window at the sixty-foot-high carvings of George Washington and company, what held my attention were the differences between the two groups.
Speaker1	In contrast to Westboro’s version of Hell—eternal torment, an idea that had become detestable to me—Witnesses believe that Hell is simply death.
Speaker1	When I quoted Bible verses that seemed to contradict this, Dustin and Laura brought forth other verses to support their position.
Speaker1	For the living know that they will die, but the dead know nothing at all … there is no work nor planning nor knowledge nor wisdom in the Grave, where you are going.
Speaker1	Their understanding of the verses I presented was fundamentally different from the one I had been raised with, and I was slack-jawed to realize that there was more than one way to read the text—that from one passage, multiple meanings could be deduced without contradicting the language in the original.
Speaker1	That interpretation was a phenomenon with real implications for believers.
Speaker1	At Westboro, we had denied that interpretation allowed for any disagreements on doctrines.
Speaker1	Knowing this first, that no prophecy of the scripture is of any private interpretation.
Speaker1	For any question or issue, there was a single correct understanding, and it was ours.
Speaker1	Legitimate disagreement with Westboro’s theology could not exist within this framework, and though I had come to reject some of the church’s precepts, I immediately fell back into that paradigm—that there was only one way—because I hadn’t yet seen another that made sense to me.
Speaker1	I was still assuming that anyone contradicting “the clear meaning of Scripture” was either deliberately mangling the truth or deluded by God into believing a lie.
Speaker1	And yet, here were two people whose kindness, intelligence, generosity, and good intentions were all self-evident.
Speaker1	They weren’t evil, stupid, or delusional.
Speaker1	They just saw things differently than I had been taught to, and they could articulate the logic and reasoning behind their thinking.
Speaker1	My head was spinning as the four of us fought the cold wind and made our way back to the Floyds’ car.
Speaker1	Grace and I looked across the backseat at each other, amazement on both of our faces, my thoughts reflected in her features: How was this possible?
Speaker1	If there truly was more than one legitimate way to understand the world, then there was nothing inherently wrong with people who believed differently than we did.
Speaker1	We could cease presuming most people were evil and ill-intentioned.
Speaker1	The hope that sprang from this realization would become the new foundation of my life, but along with that hope came still more confusion:
Speaker1	If there was more than one possible answer, how did anyone manage to decide between them?
Speaker1	Dec. 30, 2012—Day 13
Speaker1	THE GOD DELUSION
Speaker1	The journalist Andrew Mueller is of the opinion that pledging yourself to any particular religion “is no more or less weird than choosing to believe that the world is rhombus-shaped, and borne through the cosmos in the pincers of two enormous green lobsters called Esmerelda and Keith.”
Speaker1	CHAD: I can tell you that I already know you’ll talk too fast.
Speaker1	You did leave a pretty long YouTube fast-talking trail.
Speaker1	I did think the screen liked your face.
Speaker1	That’s a fact.
Speaker1	The shit you said was crazy.
Speaker1	You think I discount that because of the screen liking your face.
Speaker1	I don’t.
Speaker1	I need to know that it wasn’t necessarily you.
Speaker1	You know?
Speaker1	MEGAN: Where to begin?
Speaker1	CHAD: I don’t believe Obama is the literal antichrist.
Speaker1	I don’t believe gays marrying will trigger the end of days.
Speaker1	Etc.
Speaker1	etc.
Speaker1	MEGAN: I don’t believe either of those things, either.
Speaker1	I didn’t think there was even enough biblical evidence to support them.
Speaker1	Start with: I believed the Bible was It.
Speaker1	That it was right no matter what I would have come up with myself, even if I thought something it said was Wrong, even if it made me Angry, even if it hurt other people.
Speaker1	CHAD: Okay.
Speaker1	Not tonight.
Speaker1	And know that I think in spite of all of that, your family has so many great qualities … and obviously did such a great job of raising, educating you, etc.
Speaker1	Learning about the Floyds’ belief system was eye-opening to me.
Speaker1	In many ways, it seemed to be exactly what I had wanted from my family—an improvement on several of our most objectionable doctrines.
Speaker1	Where we had been deliberately provocative and even cruel, for instance, Witnesses strove for gentleness: in contrast to our boisterous funeral pickets, they knocked on doors to preach their gospel, meekly walking away when requested.
Speaker1	And yet, in spite of that fact, I still found myself unsatisfied.
Speaker1	My questions had become deeper since I left Topeka.
Speaker1	In all my conversations with Dustin and Laura, I had refrained from asking the question that now weighed so heavily on my mind: Why did they believe that the Bible was the capital-T Truth in the first place?
Speaker1	I wasn’t looking to be persuaded from the position I had held throughout my conscious life.
Speaker1	I had dearly loved the Scriptures from the time I was a child listening to my mother read from them each night, her reverence clear in every word.
Speaker1	When I quoted from the King James Version to journalists or curious passersby on the picket line, their eyes would often glaze over at the seventeenth-century prose—but the language and the imagery were as familiar and beautiful to me as my own mother’s voice, and comforting in their familiarity.
Speaker1	How sweet are thy words unto my taste!
Speaker1	yea, sweeter than honey to my mouth!
Speaker1	The Bible’s words became mine, and at all hours and in all circumstances, my mind would call them forth for guidance, courage, inspiration.
Speaker1	I read them, studied them, memorized them, recited them, and defended them daily.
Speaker1	Though I had turned away from it while we were still at Westboro, the question I had posed to Grace months earlier wouldn’t be denied any longer: “What if the God of the Bible isn’t the God of creation?
Speaker1	We don’t believe that the Koran has the truth about God.
Speaker1	Is it just because we were told forever that this is How Things Are?”
Speaker1	At home, my siblings and I had learned a principle: Even if God’s actions or instructions in the Bible seemed evil to our finite minds, all that He did was—by definition—perfect and just.
Speaker1	For my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways, saith the Lord.
Speaker1	For as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher than your ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts.
Speaker1	God’s Word was the standard by which all men were measured, and His actions were righteous simply by virtue of the fact that He had taken them.
Speaker1	All that was in the Bible was unquestionably Good.
Speaker1	For me, this belief was becoming more and more difficult to sustain.
Speaker1	Fortunately, the Bible’s truth and reliability was the subject of the first Sunday meeting I attended at Rapid City’s Kingdom Hall, as Jehovah’s Witnesses call their meeting places.
Speaker1	I hadn’t been inside a place of worship in nearly two months, and in all my years, I had been inside non-Westboro churches on only the rarest of occasions.
Speaker1	The foreignness of this place was both an intense curiosity and a physical revulsion, and I had to fight to suppress the latter.
Speaker1	The thoughts that kept me from bolting from the building were becoming something of a mantra: What am I feeling?
Speaker1	Why am I feeling it?
Speaker1	Are my feelings justified by evidence, or a matter of instinct?
Speaker1	Laura guided us to sit in the middle section of the hall, and I looked around, trying to collect myself by focusing on specific details.
Speaker1	The room had a capacity of about two hundred, though fewer than half the seats were filled.
Speaker1	Rows of upholstered chairs instead of pews.
Speaker1	Industrial beige carpet and a raised platform with a small lectern for the speaker.
Speaker1	“You” and “your” instead of “thee” and “thou” to address God.
Speaker1	During the prayer, husbands in suits wrapped their arms around wives in long skirts.
Speaker1	The women left their hair uncovered, giving me a sense of our collective nakedness among the congregation.
Speaker1	When I asked Laura later about the lack of head coverings, she directed me to the very same passage that Westboro used to require them—which, I was shocked to realize, was not in keeping with the plain language used there.
Speaker1	But every woman that prayeth or prophesieth with her head uncovered dishonoureth her head, the passage read, and then clarified that her hair is given her for a covering.
Speaker1	In spite of this language, Westboro required a second head covering—and took other churches’ refusal to do so as dispositive evidence that the whole congregation was rebellious and damned by God.
Speaker1	In Laura’s Bible, the text was even clearer: For her hair is given to her instead of a covering.
Speaker1	That Jehovah’s Witnesses used an entirely different version of the Scriptures—the New World Translation—brought up yet another layer of doubt.
Speaker1	I knew that translations of the Bible often varied widely in their language—and thus their meaning—but Westboro had declared the King James to be the only acceptable text.
Speaker1	All others were tainted by human hands and desires.
Speaker1	The arbitrariness of this claim now seemed apparent to me—a judgment my grandfather had made long ago on the basis of his conscience, but then denied all others the right to do likewise.
Speaker1	At Westboro, when outsiders reminded us of the many contradictions among the various versions of the Bible and questioned our use of the KJV, I instinctively avoided answering their positions directly.
Speaker1	“Because Gramps said so” would seem not to be a very convincing argument.
Speaker1	No better than “The Bible is true because my wicked heart says so,” I thought, remembering the paradox that had caused me to doubt the Bible’s infallibility in the first place.
Speaker1	I had hoped that Brother Alt’s sermon would shed some light on this question, but the longer I listened, the more fragile his case seemed.
Speaker1	Perhaps because the speaker was not my beloved mother or grandfather or relative, I listened to his sermon more critically than I ever had at Westboro.
Speaker1	He began with a quote wherein the Bible describes the Bible’s goodness.
Speaker1	All Scripture is inspired of God and beneficial for teaching, for reproving, for setting things straight, for disciplining in righteousness, so that the man of God may be fully competent, completely equipped for every good work.
Speaker1	In my head echoed the dry words of the BBC’s Louis Theroux, who refuted this sort of circular logic in his second documentary about Westboro: “Well, the Bible would say that, wouldn’t it?”
Speaker1	Brother Alt continued.
Speaker1	“Some people say, ‘Experience is the best teacher.’ No.
Speaker1	The Bible is the best teacher.”
Speaker1	I surreptitiously glanced around at the faces scattered throughout the hall, rapt and nodding.
Speaker1	His words rang hollow in my ears—as if simply asserting such a thing could make it true—but I knew that only months earlier, I would have accepted this idea without doubts, as this congregation now seemed to.
Speaker1	“Human advice leaves something to be desired, but not so with the Bible,” he said.
Speaker1	“It provides the best guidance in the world.” I couldn’t dispute that the Scriptures were filled with practical advice, meditations on human nature, and beautiful sentiments that I could never imagine rejecting.
Speaker1	Love your enemies.
Speaker1	Better is a little with righteousness than great revenues without right.
Speaker1	He that answereth a matter before he heareth it, it is a folly and shame unto him.
Speaker1	Hatred stirreth up strifes: but love covereth all sins.
Speaker1	But what of the tale of the Levite and his dismembered concubine?
Speaker1	And God’s commandment to put disobedient children to death?
Speaker1	His threat to punish idolaters by causing them to eat the flesh of their sons, of their daughters, and of their friends?
Speaker1	I listened to Brother Alt extol the virtues of the Scriptures without qualification, and I felt resistance growing inside me.
Speaker1	As I had for weeks now, I kept coming back to the image of the Almighty that my mother had first explained to me as a child holding a Barbie in the backseat of our old Camry: the divine Potter of Romans 9, fashioning a tiny group to join Him in Heaven, while sentencing the teeming billions to pass the eons of eternity in exquisite, ever-increasing torment for sins He caused them to commit—simply because it pleased Him to torture them.
Speaker1	Could there be any clearer portrait of evil?
Speaker1	I simply could not believe that this was good in any sense of the word.
Speaker1	More important, I simply did not believe it—however fearful I was to declare it plainly, even in my own mind.
Speaker1	Regardless of what the Bible said.
Speaker1	At the conclusion of the sermon, Laura introduced Grace and me to several cheerful women who welcomed us with warmth and genuine interest, and then she led us to the cabinets filled with Witness publications.
Speaker1	There were dozens of stacks of books and Bible tracts, but she found what she was looking for—a small yellow book with “What Does the Bible Really Teach?” emblazoned on the cover—and offered to go through it with us back at the inn.
Speaker1	I nodded.
Speaker1	“Please.”
Speaker1	I didn’t want to offend my new friends by launching into a critique of Brother Alt’s talk, so I was vague and quiet on the forty-five-minute drive through the darkness back to Deadwood.
Speaker1	With Grace sprawled across the backseat, her hair strewn across my lap as I scratched her head, I pondered my doubts and tried to make sense of what it all meant.
Speaker1	MEGAN: Chad.
Speaker1	Is the Bible just another book?
Speaker1	One with beautiful language and compelling stories—but not divine?
Speaker1	Like reading David Foster Wallace’s speech at Kenyon College and being moved (to feeling, to action) via words like “on fire with the same force that lit the stars”—but not thinking he’s God or speaks for God or that every word he says has to be obeyed?
Speaker1	But as he’d done so many times since I left Westboro, Chad declined to share his thoughts on the question with me.
Speaker1	We could speak of music and movies, tech and television, but when it came to matters of belief, he would change the subject instead of offering an opinion.
Speaker1	I found it frustrating, but I understood why he did it.
Speaker1	I hadn’t been so malleable since I was a child, and he was taking great pains to avoid unduly influencing me.
Speaker1	He wanted to know where my own heart and thoughts would lead me.
Speaker1	If I was going to grow out of the mental and emotional boundaries that had so long characterized my existence—the bounds of my habitation—I would need to forge my own path.
Speaker1	I awoke before dawn one morning in early January, my left hand still protectively covering my phone beneath the pillow.
Speaker1	Like most nights, I had fallen asleep texting Chad.
Speaker1	And like most mornings, I would begin my day stalking my family on Twitter.
Speaker1	Within days of my departure from Westboro, several members of the church had proactively blocked me from viewing their posts on the platform.
Speaker1	I had created a fake account in response, one whose sole use would be following—but never engaging—every account associated with the church.
Speaker1	I recognized Twitter as the only real window into my family’s lives and daily activities.
Speaker1	They might be holding signs in every photo, but where else could I see my parents and siblings?
Speaker1	How else could I know what they were up to?
Speaker1	Not even I thought this was a particularly healthy habit for me to cultivate—like Emily in Our Town, reliving the days of her former existence—and in the beginning, I had tried to limit the time I spent staring into the past at my old life.
Speaker1	Now, I didn’t even make the attempt.
Speaker1	I understood that it would be pathetic and sad to spend my days watching other people live via social media, a waste of the new life and freedom I now had.
Speaker1	Still, whenever I encountered resistance from Grace, Newbery, Libby, even Dustin and Laura, I justified the time I spent with a new hope taking root inside me:
Speaker1	What if someone could get through to them?
Speaker1	While it was tempting to despair that Westboro would ever change, I couldn’t forget the obvious counterpoint: that I had changed.
Speaker1	I had been zealous, dedicated, and absolutely convinced of our cause.
Speaker1	True, I had spent my final months at the church trying without success to change their hearts and minds—but if I could be convinced, it stood to reason that others could be, as well.
Speaker1	Part of my motive was undeniably selfish: I was desperate to have my loved ones back in my life, to lose the howling pain that held my insides in a vise grip.
Speaker1	But it was becoming clear that this wasn’t the only reason we should try to persuade church members away from their views.
Speaker1	Like the rest of the country, I had watched in horror at the news coverage of the December shooting at Sandy Hook Elementary School.
Speaker1	I knew what my family would say, but I was still saddened and dismayed to watch the scene play out the way it had so many times before: an eruption of tweets and news releases pouring salt into the gaping wounds of the victims’ families, celebrating the mass murder of first-graders as the condign wrath of God, and vowing to protest the memorials.
Speaker1	PRAY FOR MORE DEAD KIDS, the sign read.
Speaker1	My relief at not participating was tempered by distress at the number of times I had done exactly the same—and to more families than I could guess.