Speaker1	When I wanted to talk about commandments and truth, C.G.
Speaker1	was focused on humility, gentleness, compassion.
Speaker1	To him, our message and methods clearly lacked these qualities—no matter how truthful we believed our words to be.
Speaker1	I’ve commented on the signs/picketing several times.
Speaker1	You’ve never given quarter to any real discussion.
Speaker1	(They’re biblically supported, etc.)
Speaker1	I’ve said and continue to believe that it’s just BS designed to gather attention.
Speaker1	I understand that you need attention to deliver your message; however, I’ve never encountered a family as intelligent or creative as yours.
Speaker1	You are carrying those signs because of circumstances 20 years ago in a city park and subsequent momentum.
Speaker1	You can do better.
Speaker1	I had been raised to view life as a battle between good and evil, and I knew that every person fit into one of those two categories.
Speaker1	“There is only Jacob or Esau!
Speaker1	Elect or reprobate!” as my mother would say.
Speaker1	C.G.
Speaker1	didn’t see it that way.
Speaker1	He suggested a third group: people who were decent, but not religious.
Speaker1	Why would God condemn people who had lived decently in the world?
Speaker1	In truth, C.G.
Speaker1	seemed to find shades of nuance and complexity in every situation—even when it meant reversing himself on opinions he’d previously expressed in strong terms.
Speaker1	I found this tendency perplexing at first—as if I could never know for sure what he was really thinking—but I soon came to admire this quality, too.
Speaker1	He was always reevaluating, never so committed to a position that he couldn’t assimilate new evidence.
Speaker1	As I came to appreciate him more and more, it became distressing to hear of his distress.
Speaker1	When Amy Winehouse passed away that summer, my family celebrated: she was a whore and a drug addict, and her death was God’s punishment.
Speaker1	But like so many others who filled my Twitter feed, C.G.
Speaker1	lamented her early demise—a tragic loss of life and the beauty that her immense talent had brought into the world.
Speaker1	How very young twenty-seven was.
Speaker1	When a far-right terrorist murdered seventy-seven in a car bombing of Oslo and subsequent attack on a youth summer camp, church members rejoiced again.
Speaker1	“My entire Facebook wall is shattered Norwegian innocence,” C.G.
Speaker1	told me.
Speaker1	He simply could not imagine telling the parents of murdered children to PRAY FOR MORE DEAD KIDS.
Speaker1	I insisted to C.G.
Speaker1	that God was good and that all His judgments were righteous.
Speaker1	I quoted verses wherein God laughs at the calamity of unbelievers because they rejected Him.
Speaker1	Because I have called, and ye refused; I have stretched out my hand, and no man regarded; I also will laugh at your calamity; I will mock when your fear cometh.
Speaker1	But watching my family track the rising body count with glee, I felt mournful.
Speaker1	The truth was that I had started to feel sad in response to tragedies even when C.G.
Speaker1	wasn’t there to prompt me.
Speaker1	On Twitter, I came across a photo-essay about a famine in Somalia, bursting into tears at the sight of the first image: a tiny emaciated child.
Speaker1	My mother heard and immediately walked over to my desk, asking what was wrong.
Speaker1	I pointed to the photo on my screen and shook my head.
Speaker1	“Would you send me that link, hon?” she said eagerly, “I’m going to write a GodSmack about it!” The disparity between my response and my mother’s gave me pause, but she didn’t seem to notice.
Speaker1	She was already caught up in composing a celebratory blog post.
Speaker1	In the past, this discrepancy would have made me wonder what was wrong with me, but now I thought of the prophet Elisha, weeping at his prophecy of the destruction of Israel.
Speaker1	As I watched my mother’s fingers fly over the keys, a small part of me began to wonder if there was something wrong with Westboro.
Speaker1	I couldn’t acknowledge any of this to C.G., of course, or even to myself.
Speaker1	Instead I quoted Bible verses and insisted that he needed to stop substituting his judgments for God’s.
Speaker1	When our discussions became thorny like this, as they inevitably did, he directed us back to music, books, movies.
Speaker1	He introduced me to David Foster Wallace and Norwegian cookies, writer and comedian Jake Fogelnest, and the music of John Roderick, Blind Pilot, the Avett Brothers, and Foster the People.
Speaker1	They became special to me for the simple fact that they’d come from him, but I also discovered that I really enjoyed them, too.
Speaker1	I didn’t want to forget anything he told me, so I started recording everything in a Field Notes Brand notebook—the notebook itself being another item he’d introduced me to.
Speaker1	He was a hipster through and through—I’d never known one before—and I quickly came to love all things I-heard-about-this-cool-new-group-months-ago.
Speaker1	I was saturated in his digital presence, even though we were worlds apart.
Speaker1	Throughout it all, we approached each other with the deliberate caution one might employ in the presence of a dangerous, frightened animal; a single false step could be one’s undoing, or it might send the beast hightailing it into obscurity, never to exploit another Triple Word Score again.
Speaker1	This sense that so much was at stake with each word was unwavering, almost palpable, and the thrill of it was combustible.
Speaker1	There was no thought of speaking openly or directly about any feelings we might be developing, because to do so would be to acknowledge that this was about more than just God, and that would mean the end of it.
Speaker1	And yet the subtext was always there, simmering just beneath conscious thought; I saw it, and I refused to see it, limerence disguised by equivocation and the purposefully easy cadence of our conversations.
Speaker1	It was in the words we chose to deploy on the game board (“UNREQUITED”).
Speaker1	It was in the songs and lyrics we shared (I’ve put no one else above us / We’ll still be best friends when all turns to dust).
Speaker1	It was in the way we mocked each other with doting nicknames masquerading as insults (“circus monkey,” “old man”).
Speaker1	It was in the literary quotes we presented without comment or preamble (“I am also inclined to overuse the word ‘old,’ which actually has less to do with age, as it seems to me, than it does with familiarity.
Speaker1	It sets a thing apart as something regarded with a modest, habitual affection.
Speaker1	Sometimes it suggests haplessness or vulnerability.
Speaker1	I say ‘old Boughton,’ I say ‘this shabby old town,’ and I mean that they are very near my heart”).
Speaker1	We were offering the words of writers and journalists, musicians and comedians, in order to convey what fear and decorum prevented us from saying ourselves.
Speaker1	I never allowed myself to imagine it, but it would be foolish to deny the secret hope that I came to harbor: that he could be mine someday.
Speaker1	That he would eventually rip off the mask and appear at church one Sunday morning.
Speaker1	That was the only way it could happen, of course; he’d have to join Westboro.
Speaker1	I knew this was the only way, and I did what I could—keeping my words as disciplined and proper as I could make them—to sway him in that direction.
Speaker1	In the subtlest of ways, I was trying to convince him of the rightness of our doctrines, the necessity of the protests, and the magnificence of life at the church.
Speaker1	I never directly encouraged him to come to Topeka.
Speaker1	Westboro had always frowned on attempting conversions; we didn’t want to guilt or cajole people into joining our ranks, because we believed conversion was God’s job alone.
Speaker1	Still, I insinuated that it was the right move—and because he was responding with curiosity instead of condemnation, I continued to hope.
Speaker1	I told several church members about him, even, as honestly as I could bring myself to be.
Speaker1	I didn’t tell them he was the most captivating person I’d ever known.
Speaker1	I didn’t tell them I loved my conversations with him more than just about any other part of my day.
Speaker1	I didn’t tell them what he had promised me when I worried aloud that he would one day decide I was evil and stop talking to me (“I never will unless you want me to”).
Speaker1	Since I was hiding the depth of my infatuation even from myself, it wasn’t so very difficult to hide it from the rest of my family, too.
Speaker1	The latent dream of my waking hours became impossible to ignore one night in late September.
Speaker1	Seven months of these conversations had left me impossibly intrigued and altogether obsessed, and as I slept, I dreamed.
Speaker1	In the dream, I’m standing on the driveway outside my house one summer Saturday; the grass is a vibrant green, the neighborhood alive with activity, and the noonday sun is beating down unmercifully—just like I like it.
Speaker1	A black car with darkly tinted windows pulls up beside me, and a tall, blond man opens the door and steps out of the backseat on the driver’s side.
Speaker1	I can’t see his face and we’ve never met, but I know his name: Chad Garrett.
Speaker1	Suddenly I’m on the other side of the block, on the front lawn of the church itself.
Speaker1	There are church members all around working on maintenance—mowing the lawns and cleaning the inside of the building and playing with the kids out back—but I’m looking for him.
Speaker1	He comes around the corner looking for me, too, and we’re alone for a moment.
Speaker1	He walks over and embraces me, his hands tangling in my curls as he holds me against him.
Speaker1	I’m keenly aware that we’re on the church’s security cameras, and I know I’ll be in trouble when everyone finds out, but I can’t bring myself to stop.
Speaker1	I want this so badly.
Speaker1	I’ve waited so long for him.
Speaker1	It is undeniable.
Speaker1	When I awoke, I was shaking.
Speaker1	I could still feel his hands in my hair.
Speaker1	It was September 30, and I spent the day fighting back tears, my stomach constantly on the verge of spilling its contents, though it was empty.
Speaker1	When he started a game that night, I told him I couldn’t talk to him anymore, or ever again.
Speaker1	That I was deleting Words With Friends.
Speaker1	We went back and forth about the whys and the wherefores for a little while, but I knew I was right.
Speaker1	It had become undeniable.
Speaker1	This could not be.
Speaker1	It would destroy me, body and soul, just like God had promised.
Speaker1	Then when lust hath conceived, it bringeth forth sin: and sin, when it is finished, bringeth forth death.
Speaker1	Can a man take fire in his bosom, and his clothes not be burned?
Speaker1	I’d already let this ungodly affection for an unbeliever take root in my heart.
Speaker1	If I didn’t rip it out with both hands, I would fall away and lose everything—my family, my friends, my whole life in this world—and in the world to come I’d be tormented in Hell for all of eternity, where the worm that consumes your flesh never dies and the fire is never quenched.
Speaker1	I didn’t imagine it was possible for this to be any more gut-wrenching than it already was, but I was swiftly corrected when the messages kept coming:
Speaker1	You know I love you.
Speaker1	You know I do.
Speaker1	It’s not just the idea of you.
Speaker1	I know you.
Speaker1	You also know I’m not coming to Topeka.
Speaker1	My heart hit the floor with a sickening thud.
Speaker1	It was what I’d unconsciously ached to hear for so many long months, followed by what I’d feared was true all along.
Speaker1	I thought bitterly of Jack Boughton, a character from Gilead, the first book he’d ever recommended to me: “I think hope is the worst thing in the world.
Speaker1	I really do.
Speaker1	It makes a fool of you while it lasts.
Speaker1	And then, when it’s gone, it’s like there’s nothing left of you at all.”
Speaker1	I hated myself.
Speaker1	Just before I deleted the app, he said, “South Dakota.”
Speaker1	It took me less than two minutes to find his name.
Speaker1	On a list of South Dakota State’s Attorneys, there it was: “Chad Fjelland, Clark County.” C.G.’s username included that foreign letter combination—“F/j”—and I was sure this had to be him.
Speaker1	I looked him up on Google and found a photo: there he is, sitting in an office at a big wooden desk with papers strewn about, law books filling the shelves against the far wall.
Speaker1	He’s wearing a white button-up shirt, his tie thrown casually over his shoulder.
Speaker1	I stared for a minute, feeling so strange to finally have a face.
Speaker1	I had to cut him out of my life forever, but first I had to know more.
Speaker1	I wanted to know if he’d been honest.
Speaker1	Online research had always been a strength of mine, so I spent a few minutes using my talents to uncover as much about him as I could, to see if he’d told me the truth.
Speaker1	My mind swept through seven months of talk and came to rest on three data points that could possibly be confirmed independently: the size of the community he lived in and two deaths that had occurred there.
Speaker1	First, I looked up the funeral home’s website and searched through the obituaries.
Speaker1	It only took a moment to find what I was looking for, and my heart swelled a little.
Speaker1	He’d told me the truth.
Speaker1	“Clark, SD” was my next search term.
Speaker1	Population: 1,139.
Speaker1	Truth.
Speaker1	I felt frantic, pathetic, and out of control.
Speaker1	I was entering true stalker territory, but I couldn’t stop; I paid $6.95 for a public records search.
Speaker1	POSSIBLE ALIASES: Chad G Fjelland.
Speaker1	“C.
Speaker1	G.” Truth.
Speaker1	AGE: 39.
Speaker1	Older than I’d believed—fourteen years my senior—but he’d never told me otherwise.
Speaker1	Truth.
Speaker1	MARRIAGE INDEX: No Records Found.
Speaker1	The most important part.
Speaker1	Truth.
Speaker1	There was a list of addresses and phone numbers, but they meant nothing to me.
Speaker1	I sat in the empty office staring at my computer screen for a long time.
Speaker1	In the span of twenty minutes I’d gone from total ignorance to stalker-level scrutiny, and I finally had answers.
Speaker1	I had a name and a face, proof that I’d been conversing with a real man who really existed in the real world.
Speaker1	His name was Chad, even, just as I’d dreamed.
Speaker1	And now he was gone forever.
Speaker1	I crawled into bed and cried until I slept.
Speaker1	I tried to undo it all the next night, to take back my insistence that we never speak again.
Speaker1	No, he said, we couldn’t talk anymore.
Speaker1	It had all become too much.
Speaker1	I agreed.
Speaker1	What else could I do?
Speaker1	I didn’t tell him I’d hunted him down and discovered his identity, but I did tell him I’d dreamed the name “Chad Garrett.” I didn’t know whether the middle name was correct, because the records search had only said “G.” Within half an hour, he’d sent me an email: a list confirming all the personal data I’d found the day before and more.
Speaker1	The only thing that didn’t match was his age.
Speaker1	“Age 38.”
Speaker1	I shrugged it off.
Speaker1	The public records search must’ve been based on the year, and his birthday just hadn’t come yet this year.
Speaker1	Our age difference was unexpected, but by then, I just couldn’t bring myself to care.
Speaker1	And anyway, my eyes kept returning to the first line of the email:
Speaker1	“Chad Garrett Fjelland.”
Speaker1	Chad Garrett.
Speaker1	Chad Garrett.
Speaker1	Could it possibly be that my dream had been right?
Speaker1	It felt like a sign from God.
Speaker1	It gave me hope that maybe the rest of my dream would come true someday, too.
Speaker1	He said, “Believing in your heart that you’ll always be anonymous, and then to give that up … I think that maybe that’s really the only way that a human being can share their heart.
Speaker1	I never planned on surrendering that anonymity.
Speaker1	You have what’s left of mine.
Speaker1	Just never hurt me.”
Speaker1	It was late.
Speaker1	He made the last play of the game and won.
Speaker1	Ever the tease, he said, “Finishing second in a two-person word game only hurts when you’re better at making words.
Speaker1	Here’s three: goodbye, dear Megan.”
Speaker1	Ever the know-it-all, I corrected his grammar: “Here *are* three.”
Speaker1	“You passed the test,” he said.
Speaker1	“Unchanged from the day I ‘met’ you.
Speaker1	Unchanged.”
Speaker1	For the second night in a row, I cried myself to sleep.
Speaker1	Months went by.
Speaker1	I was depressed and missed him terribly for a while.
Speaker1	I came to hate the Internet, because I couldn’t ever get away from him.
Speaker1	He’d deleted his Twitter account—my Gatsby was gone for good—but there was a new one whose tweets and favorites I checked obsessively for months after we stopped talking.
Speaker1	And then there was his Spotify account.
Speaker1	His Instagram.
Speaker1	His Facebook, though he didn’t friend me.
Speaker1	But even apart from the Internet, he seemed always near at hand.
Speaker1	His hipster music began to play on mainstream radio stations, eventually becoming fodder for Westboro parodies.
Speaker1	My brothers had taken a liking to his little Field Notes notebooks, too, and I loved and hated the sight of them strewn about the house.
Speaker1	Pathetic.
Speaker1	Eventually I lost hope.
Speaker1	Life went back to normal, but it was grayer than before.
Speaker1	I’d finally seen what I was missing, and my world felt impoverished without it.
Speaker1	Without him.
Speaker1	It got easier with time, but I woke up one morning the following June feeling altogether desolate.
Speaker1	A dream again, though I couldn’t remember it.
Speaker1	The house was silent so early in the morning—most of its eleven inhabitants were still asleep—and I traipsed down the stairs to find my mama sitting in our office in her pajamas, her face lit up by her computer monitor.
Speaker1	She looked over at me with a wide smile that morphed into maternal concern when she saw that I’d been crying.
Speaker1	She rose immediately and hurried over to put her arms around me, rubbing circles on my back.
Speaker1	“What is it, sweet doll?” she asked softly.
Speaker1	I couldn’t talk through the tears, and she just held me tight for a long moment.
Speaker1	Finally I managed to choke out between sobs, “I just feel so alone sometimes.
Speaker1	I didn’t know it was possible to be around so many people and feel so alone.”
Speaker1	She squeezed me and didn’t let go.
Speaker1	She understood.
Speaker1	“Oh, love bug.” She was so gentle.
Speaker1	“The arm of the Lord is not shortened.
Speaker1	He will comfort you.
Speaker1	He does comfort you.
Speaker1	I love you.
Speaker1	We have a wonderful life.”
Speaker1	She was right.
Speaker1	She had always been right.
Speaker1	Outsiders had scoffed at the long years of my mother’s anti-lust entreaties, the hysterical ravings of a Puritanical sex-obsessed hypocrite: “Really?” they’d ask, “God is going to send you to Hell for going on a date?
Speaker1	What exactly is the harm?” But they knew better.
Speaker1	The truth was memorialized everywhere from Leo Tolstoy’s Anna Karenina to Leonard Cohen’s “Hallelujah,” King David’s gaze lingering on Bathsheba as she bathed on the roof, Her beauty and the moonlight overthrew you.
Speaker1	Chance encounters igniting obsessions that shatter into heartache.
Speaker1	The most pitiful part was that mine hadn’t even needed a face or a body to root its hemlock inside me.
Speaker1	He was just words on a screen, and more than half a year had passed since I’d said goodbye to him.
Speaker1	Can a man take fire in his bosom and his clothes not be burned?
Speaker1	I squeezed my mother and buried my face in her shoulder.
