Speaker1	“What do you mean by ‘strict’?” I asked.
Speaker1	Cora described several prohibitions her mother had imposed, including a ban on the celebration of birthdays, Christmas, and other holidays.
Speaker1	“If anything bad happened to me,” she said, “it was because I was a sinner.
Speaker1	It was because I deserved it.
Speaker1	Instead of showing compassion or understanding or trying to help—you know, being a parent—my mother said things like that.”
Speaker1	I was dumbfounded.
Speaker1	Westboro and this woman’s mother clearly did not draw from all the same wells, but their attitudes sounded remarkably similar: an unwavering certainty in their righteousness and a categorical disdain for any ideas that did not fit with their own.
Speaker1	Although it saddened me to hear, I also felt a surge of recognition that made me oddly hopeful.
Speaker1	Maybe it wasn’t just us.
Speaker1	For so long, I had seen Westboro as an anomaly, unique among all the world.
Speaker1	I feared no one would understand what that life was like, and it made me feel alone—cast out of our family and forever set apart from the world for all the years we had spent antagonizing others.
Speaker1	Hiding from the past seemed like the only answer, and it was another reason we had come to this sleepy tourist town in the frozen Hills.
Speaker1	Grace and I looked at each other, and I knew we were thinking the same thing.
Speaker1	We turned back to Cora and told her everything.
Speaker1	“Next time,” she promised at the end of the night, “I’ll add a shot of Jack Daniels to your hot chocolate.”
Speaker1	It was nearing eleven the following morning by the time I finally awoke from a dead sleep.
Speaker1	I opened my eyes and waited for them to adjust to the cold light pouring in from the windows just next to the head of the bed.
Speaker1	I knew without looking that Grace was still asleep, her breath slow and even.
Speaker1	Even under the blankets, I was shivering.
Speaker1	I slowly sat up and scratched my sister’s head.
Speaker1	“Gracie?” I whispered.
Speaker1	“Emph!” she grunted in protest, pulling the blankets up to her ears.
Speaker1	I persisted.
Speaker1	“Shall I go make us breakfast?
Speaker1	Half a muffin and coffee?” We still weren’t eating much.
Speaker1	There was another petulant grunt from beneath the blanket, but Grace opened her eyes and we bargained: I would go on a mission to find the kitchen and return with breakfast, while she did some more unpacking.
Speaker1	I picked up a bag of English muffins and a can of Folgers instant coffee and headed downstairs.
Speaker1	The kitchen seemed improbably small after the historic grandeur of the other rooms on the first floor—broad spaces with high ceilings, beautiful hardwood floors, and brilliant sunlight streaming in through huge windows that spanned most of the distance from floor to ceiling.
Speaker1	When breakfast was ready, I returned to the attic and Grace and I got down to the main purpose of our trip: reading.
Speaker1	Back at the beginning of my communication with C.G.—Chad, I chided myself—he had introduced me to the writer David Foster Wallace.
Speaker1	I’d begun exploring Wallace’s words in whatever forms I could find them—short stories, essays, interviews—and had shared them with Grace.
Speaker1	We were particularly enthralled with a scene from one interview, in which Wallace recalled taking a year off from college to drive a school bus.
Speaker1	He was unhappy, and there was much he wanted to read that wouldn’t be assigned in his classes.
Speaker1	“And I read,” Wallace said; “pretty much everything I’ve read was read during that year.” Grace reminded me of the line in the weeks after we left Westboro, and it became an inspiration for our trip.
Speaker1	I couldn’t think of a more suitable use of our newfound freedom: trying to see the world from the perspectives of others.
Speaker1	Following Wallace’s example sounded like a grand adventure—an indulgence that would never have been countenanced at Westboro—but more than anything, it seemed like it might help Grace and me find some answers.
Speaker1	We would only have one month before she’d have to return to school in Kansas for the spring semester, but it was better than nothing.
Speaker1	In preparation for our reading trip, Grace and I had gathered stacks of books from a few friends, and had also paid a visit to the Lawrence Public Library.
Speaker1	While she had wandered off to the fiction section looking for Flannery O’Connor and J. D. Salinger, I’d asked a middle-aged librarian where I might find books on philosophy and religion.
Speaker1	I had run my fingers along their spines for a few minutes, reading titles and noting authors: David Hume, Immanuel Kant, C. S. Lewis, Friedrich Nietzsche.
Speaker1	After a moment, I’d found myself stepping back and staring up at the stacks, centuries’ worth of human thought devoted to understanding God and the world and how to live in it.
Speaker1	I had wondered how we at Westboro could have ever believed that we alone had discovered the one true answer to it all.
Speaker1	I had flushed with embarrassment at our arrogance, and at my own ignorance.
Speaker1	What did I know of these philosophers and their ideas?
Speaker1	Beware lest any man spoil you through philosophy and vain deceit, after the traditions of men, after the rudiments of the world, and not after Christ.
Speaker1	It was a catchall verse that had kept me from ever venturing too far off the beaten path, allowing me to dismiss out of hand any challenges to the most fundamental premises of our beliefs: Did God exist?
Speaker1	And was the Bible His infallible Word?
Speaker1	I had been taught that these were the questions of fools, but now I felt foolish for all the years I had failed to ask them.
Speaker1	I knew that I would read the Bible on this trip, but at Newbery’s suggestion, I had also brought along books by Christopher Hitchens, Sam Harris, and Richard Dawkins: God Is Not Great, The End of Faith, and The God Delusion.
Speaker1	Their presence felt illicit, so I decided to ease into the journey with a short book by Hemingway, whom I had also never read.
Speaker1	Lying prone on the hardwood floor with my elbows propped up on a pillow, I picked up Newbery’s copy of The Old Man and the Sea and began.
Speaker1	My phone sat nearby, ready and waiting for me to record any lines I found particularly moving.
Speaker1	I needed wisdom and direction, and I intended to cull as much of it as I could from as many places as I could find it.
Speaker1	Dec. 18, 2012—Day 1
Speaker1	THE OLD MAN & THE SEA
Speaker1	Now is no time to think of what you do not have.
Speaker1	Think of what you can do with what there is.
Speaker1	Despite our best intentions to read uninterrupted for hours on end, Grace and I didn’t make it too long before we decided it was time for lunch.
Speaker1	Grace sat at the kitchen table and read Anna Karenina aloud to me as I assembled peanut butter sandwiches, and then continued as I cleaned up the kitchen after lunch—washing pans, loading and unloading the dishwasher, sweeping the floor.
Speaker1	Most of the mess didn’t belong to us, but compared to the nightly hurricane that constituted dinner in the Phelps-Roper home, this was nothing.
Speaker1	And in any case, I was always happiest being useful.
Speaker1	A door slammed and we both froze, my eyes snapping up to Grace’s.
Speaker1	I peeked out the kitchen threshold, past the dining room and the entryway, and saw Laura coming through the front door, followed closely by a tall man with dark sideburns looking smart in a black peacoat and thick-rimmed glasses.
Speaker1	Damn, I thought.
Speaker1	Too late to hide now.
Speaker1	I tiptoed back to the sink.
Speaker1	“I’ve never seen the kitchen so clean!” the man said.
Speaker1	“I’m Dustin.
Speaker1	You must be…” His finger wavered back and forth between my sister and me.
Speaker1	“Megan?” he asked, pointing at me.
Speaker1	“And Grace?”
Speaker1	I grabbed a towel to dry my hands and then shook his.
Speaker1	He explained that since the offices for TDG, the marketing firm I’d read about, were just down the hill and around the corner, he and Laura often made the ten-minute walk home for lunch.
Speaker1	I looked at the clock and made a mental note to stay away from the first floor during any hour that could plausibly be considered lunchtime.
Speaker1	With three people now milling about, the kitchen had become uncomfortably full, so I stepped out of the main area and sat down with Grace at the table.
Speaker1	I watched the couple as they raided the refrigerator for leftover pizza and some sort of rice dish, surreptitiously studying them for signs of latent psychopathy.
Speaker1	“So what are you guys up to today?
Speaker1	Is there anything specific you’re interested in doing while you’re here?” Dustin’s tone was friendly and helpful, and I sensed that he was in the habit of acting as tour guide.
Speaker1	“Is there anything you’d recommend?” I asked.
Speaker1	He rattled off a list of local attractions, most of which I didn’t recognize, but he noted that this time of year, many of Deadwood’s historic locations were either closed or only functioning on a limited basis.
Speaker1	“And then there’s hiking,” he continued.
Speaker1	“Just up the hill is Mount Moriah Cemetery, where famous Deadwood locals are buried—Wild Bill Hickok, Calamity Jane, and Seth Bullock.”
Speaker1	Fifteen minutes later, Grace and I were dressed and out the door.
Speaker1	The cemetery gates were only about three blocks up the hill, but we were huffing and puffing almost as soon as we set out.
Speaker1	The incline was steep, the temperature was below freezing, and the air up here—nearly a mile above sea level—was far thinner than we were accustomed to.
Speaker1	We trekked along a paved path through the cemetery for a time, but layers of snow and ice made it difficult to follow.
Speaker1	I looked over my shoulder at the falling sun.
Speaker1	“We’re not gonna make it if we keep trying to follow the road,” I warned Grace.
Speaker1	There were no more gravestones here, so she shrugged and began sidestepping directly up the mountain.
Speaker1	Navigating straight up through the trees and around the iciest patches as best we could, we arrived at the top in less than twenty minutes.
Speaker1	To the west was a view of pine forests in Deadwood Gulch, and to the east, a vast expanse of the Black Hills with their rounded summits, some covered in snow and others dotted with the standing remains of dead trees.
Speaker1	The wind was ferocious.
Speaker1	We only had a few minutes before we had to head back—I was convinced we needed a cushion of daylight in case one of us broke several bones tumbling over the rocky edge or down the steep slope—but I sat down on a frozen concrete beam to take in the view anyway.
Speaker1	Grace sat across from me and slipped her phone out of her coat pocket.
Speaker1	“The Snail and the Rosebush,” she began, “by Hans Christian Andersen.”
Speaker1	It was a short tale, maybe half a dozen minutes long, but the wind was whipping away my tears by the end.
Speaker1	“But shouldn’t all of us on earth give the best we have to others and offer whatever is in our power?” the Rosebush asked the Snail.
Speaker1	“What do I have to do with the world?” the Snail derided.
Speaker1	“I spit at the world.
Speaker1	It’s no good!
Speaker1	The world means nothing to me.” My mind called forth images of our most contentious protests, surrounded by scores of counter-protesters who were screaming, chanting, only held back by lines of officers and police barricades.
Speaker1	I remembered our intent in those moments, the insistent need to show ourselves unbowed by “these God-haters,” our willingness to wound, our desire to cut them down in their arrogance—even when they were preparing to bury their closest loved ones.
Speaker1	Which of those people wouldn’t love to hurt me now?
Speaker1	An admission of guilt would be blood in the water.
Speaker1	They would eat me alive.
Speaker1	It was clear that the Snail’s path was the only option now: “I retire within myself, and there I shall stay.”
Speaker1	My sister came to sit next to me, and we linked arms and wept.
Speaker1	“I don’t want to be a snail!” I cried into her shoulder.
Speaker1	We could never be more than an object of scorn to the world.
Speaker1	What did we have to offer anyone?
Speaker1	Our lives were forever tainted and would never amount to anything so good and pure as the Rosebush.
Speaker1	“The sun was warm and the air so refreshing.
Speaker1	I drank of the clear dew and the strong rain.
Speaker1	I breathed.
Speaker1	I lived.
Speaker1	A power rose in me from out of the earth; a strength came down from up above; I felt an increasing happiness, always new, always great, so I had to blossom over and over again.
Speaker1	That was my life; I couldn’t do anything else.”
Speaker1	It was just too late for us.
Speaker1	We stood and started back, arriving at the inn at sunset again.
Speaker1	Twenty-four hours.
Speaker1	Dec. 19, 2012—Day 2
Speaker1	THE SUN ALSO RISES
Speaker1	You can’t get away from yourself by moving from one place to another.
Speaker1	It was only our second full day up here, but we’d already slipped into the pattern that would define our trip: Sleep late.
Speaker1	Eat breakfast.
Speaker1	Read.
Speaker1	Eat lunch.
Speaker1	Read.
Speaker1	Use the late afternoon to explore the Black Hills.
Speaker1	Eat dinner.
Speaker1	And then read until it was time to sleep again.
Speaker1	Tonight we would do our evening reading at the Four Aces, to keep Cora company on her next shift.
Speaker1	I already felt like a regular, and the employees greeted me like one.
Speaker1	Cora put mugs of hot chocolate in front of Grace and me, and introduced us to a couple of the dealers working that night, Ryan and Derek.
Speaker1	I recognized Ryan as the one who’d stared too long when I came in the last time—and soon discovered that it was because he had recognized me.
Speaker1	An amateur filmmaker and fan of the director Kevin Smith, Ryan had followed my years-long Twitter battle with Smith (#SaveMegan).
Speaker1	With eyes wide and mouth agape, I shook my head.
Speaker1	How was this possible?
Speaker1	I’d traveled twelve hours to this tiny town at the edge of South Dakota to get away from everything and everyone who knew me—only to be spotted on the first night at the first establishment I’d wandered into.
Speaker1	What were the odds?
Speaker1	“I need a drink,” I told Cora, using a poor imitation of a wink to disguise how unsettled Ryan’s revelation had made me.
Speaker1	She poured a shot of Jack Daniels’ Tennessee Honey into my hot chocolate, which I nearly spewed out the instant it touched my tongue.
Speaker1	Disgusting.
Speaker1	Not wanting to be rude, I sipped the rest of it slowly while we all conversed—and though the flavor didn’t improve, I felt my stomach grow warm and my worries fade.
Speaker1	As the dealers rotated through their stations and then off the gaming floor, they’d come to the bar to chat.
Speaker1	Grace and I would ask them questions about their families and their lives—so foreign to us—and they’d ask about Westboro, what it was like to picket in the face of angry crowds, how our peers at school had treated us.
Speaker1	They got a real kick out of the fact that we had made a habit of protesting outside our own high school over our lunch hour, snacking on Lunchables while classmates drove by honking their horns, flipping us off, and throwing the occasional sandwich.
Speaker1	“Do you have any family outside of the church?” Cora asked.
Speaker1	I beamed and told them the happiest moment I’d had since leaving.
Speaker1	Two nights after our departure from Westboro, Libby had driven Grace and me to our brother Josh’s house.
Speaker1	It had been eight years since he left—several lifetimes, it seemed—and at my request, Libby hadn’t alerted him to the fact that Grace and I had left, too.
Speaker1	My stomach was in knots during the forty-five-minute drive.
Speaker1	I had a terrible feeling that he would be unrecognizable to me, and that I would be to him.
Speaker1	I kept thinking of the terrible things I’d said about him when asked by journalists.
Speaker1	I’d told them he was a disobedient rebel.
Speaker1	I’d told them he was bound for Hell.
Speaker1	I’d told them he wasn’t my brother anymore.
Speaker1	For whosoever shall do the will of my Father which is in heaven, the same is my brother, and sister, and mother.
Speaker1	I suddenly felt so silly and arrogant for judging him all these years, based only on his behavior as a nineteen-year-old kid and the fact that he wasn’t a member of Westboro.
Speaker1	Would he forgive me?
Speaker1	What kind of person had he become since I’d known him?
Speaker1	It was pitch-dark when we arrived, nearly 9 P.M. Libby found the keypad and entered the code to open the garage door, and I followed her in while Grace stayed outside, waiting to see how Josh would react.
Speaker1	All the inside lights were on, and I only needed a glance and a moment to take it all in: the granite countertops and matching kitchen appliances, the hardwood floors, high ceilings, and the inviting scent of maple-vanilla candles.
Speaker1	This was the home of someone who’d made something of himself.
Speaker1	Libby pointed me down the steps just inside the door, and I proceeded alone, pausing at the bottom of the stairs to look around.
Speaker1	It was classic Josh.
Speaker1	To my right, a framed collection of theater ticket stubs.
Speaker1	Still the movie buff.
Speaker1	Above the basement door, a wooden plaque that read, “I’m ashamed of what I did for a Klondike Bar.” The same sort of saying that had characterized his entire T-shirt collection in high school.
Speaker1	And there in front of me was Josh himself, playing a video game with a headset on, his back to me—exactly the same position in which I’d found him so many times in his basement bedroom back at home.
Speaker1	Some things never change.
Speaker1	I held my breath, crossed the room, and sat down on the couch adjacent to the one he was occupying.
Speaker1	His head turned, and he froze.
Speaker1	Silence.
Speaker1	I studied his face for a beat, looking for signs of anger or rejection and finding only incomprehension.
Speaker1	I saw that where he had always been slim before, he was thick and muscled now.
Speaker1	He had less hair, but his face was the same—the male version of mine.
Speaker1	My head started to spin, and I finally exhaled.
Speaker1	In my hands was an envelope full of photos—of our parents and our siblings through all the years Josh had missed.
Speaker1	I pulled them out and started to babble, not knowing what to expect.
Speaker1	“Hi!” I squeaked nervously.
Speaker1	“I brought these for you.
Speaker1	This is Jonah, and this is Gabe, and Noah … Luke.
Speaker1	Grace took this one of Mom and Dad when we were hiking, and…”
Speaker1	He sat still, unmoving, and I rambled on.
Speaker1	Finally, he interrupted: “Hold on a second!” He stood up, took the photos from my hands, set them on the couch, and motioned for me to stand.
Speaker1	His embrace had all the intensity of my final ones with Bekah and Mom and Dad, and though this one was “hello” instead of “goodbye,” I couldn’t stop the tears from spilling over again.
Speaker1	Grace walked in the basement door a minute later.
Speaker1	Josh stepped back from me.
Speaker1	“What are you doing here?” He sounded truly bewildered.
Speaker1	As if he thought it might be a dream.
Speaker1	We stayed up talking until the wee hours of the morning, and if it weren’t for the sweeping changes in Josh’s life, it would have seemed like we’d never been apart at all.
Speaker1	Josh was married now and had a little boy.
Speaker1	He’d finished college and gotten a master’s degree.
Speaker1	He had a great job.
Speaker1	He had just bought this house.
Speaker1	Motivated, industrious, and hardworking, just like our parents.
Speaker1	I was elated for my brother and proud of what he had accomplished without the vast support system we’d grown up with—but I couldn’t help feeling very small next to him.
Speaker1	There were only seventeen months between our births, and at twenty-eight, he’d already managed to build a wonderful life.
Speaker1	I felt a pang of envy and regret that he and Grace had both chosen to leave Westboro so much earlier in their lives.
Speaker1	Their decisions had left them more years to live in a world outside of Westboro’s conjuring—years I had wasted hurting people in a misguided effort to serve an image of a God that seemed less real all the time.
Speaker1	But I got more years with our family, I reminded myself before bitterness could root itself too deeply.
Speaker1	Eight more years of morning coffee with our mother.
Speaker1	Of sharing jokes and indie rock music with our dad.
Speaker1	Of pulling Noah and Luke around the neighborhood in the little green wagon while they slept.
Speaker1	Of French-braiding Bekah’s shimmery auburn hair while she read aloud to me.
Speaker1	I called forth memories to steel myself against twin but opposing tendencies I felt warring inside me: between regretting the past and romanticizing it.
Speaker1	I couldn’t allow bitterness to steal the beauty in my family, or love to conceal the destructiveness in it.
Speaker1	I wouldn’t rewrite history.
Speaker1	I would hold the whole messy truth of it to myself all at once.
Speaker1	I wouldn’t do to them what we had done to Josh.
Speaker1	“We have more family, actually,” I told Cora.
Speaker1	“Like my grandparents.
Speaker1	We haven’t spoken to them yet.”
Speaker1	“Why not?” she wondered.
Speaker1	I paused.
Speaker1	Growing up, I’d hardly known my dad’s parents.
Speaker1	Since neither had ever been part of our church community, we didn’t see them except for rare visits.
Speaker1	My mother had always spoken derisively of them, and I understood from a young age that they were not like us.
Speaker1	Nana and Grandpa had married young, and divorced amicably when my father was a baby—a cardinal sin in Westboro’s estimation, especially because they had both remarried.
Speaker1	Still, their occasional stops had been grudgingly allowed until a few years earlier, not long after Grandpa’s final visit.
Speaker1	He had stopped by unannounced one summer day, and my mother had used the opportunity to instigate a fight with him: she asked him what he thought of our protests at soldiers’ funerals.
Speaker1	Grandpa was a career military man, serving in the U.S. Air Force until he retired, so when my mother asked, he told her exactly what he thought of the protests.
Speaker1	Seeing the contentious discussion, my nine-year-old brother Noah wandered over: “Who is this guy?
Speaker1	!” he demanded.
Speaker1	Grandpa had left a few minutes later, and I hadn’t spoken to him since.
Speaker1	My parents wrote letters to Nana and Grandpa enumerating my grandparents’ sins, insisting they wouldn’t expose us children to such corrupting influences, and that had been the end of it.
Speaker1	“I don’t know exactly,” I told Cora.
Speaker1	“I just have this … bad feeling.” She nodded, but she clearly didn’t understand.
Speaker1	The truth was that I didn’t understand, either, and the fact that I lacked a good answer—a sound explanation for this “bad feeling”—bothered me.
Speaker1	My grandmother had shown me nothing but kindness, but I couldn’t seem to stop judging her according to the church’s rubric.
Speaker1	I had already crossed the lines between “Us” and “Them” several times—for Josh, Newbery, Chad, Libby, even Cora and Ryan here in the casino—but somehow, those lines remained firmly in place.