Speaker1	Chapter four.
Speaker1	The Tongue Is a Fire
Speaker1	“Talking to her is like taking a drink from a fire hydrant!” my mother exclaimed with a slight shake of the head.
Speaker1	She leaned down to take the paintbrushes from my grubby hands, and for a moment her blue eyes were level with mine—now wide with mischief imagining what it might be like to take a drink from a fire hydrant.
Speaker1	“You’re so much like her.” She grinned and kissed my cheek.
Speaker1	I only had a fistful of years under my paint smock back then, but already—and to my greatest delight and honor—the comparisons to my aunt Margie came swift and steady: big hair, big voice, big personality.
Speaker1	“Big personality” was sometimes code for “big drama,” but I didn’t know that yet.
Speaker1	I adored Margie, and from the way my mother, grandmother, and the rest of my aunts spoke of her, I knew this resemblance to be a very good thing.
Speaker1	“She has such beautiful, beautiful hair,” said one.
Speaker1	“She is so sharp, just smart as a whip,” said another.
Speaker1	“You sure do talk a lot,” said most of them.
Speaker1	I couldn’t seem to stop myself, though it didn’t often occur to me to try.
Speaker1	Mostly the words tumbling around inside my head mirrored the unruly curls that sat atop it: copious and uncontained, inevitably springing loose from every paltry attempt at confinement.
Speaker1	It fell to my poor mother to shoulder the yeoman’s share of the burden this created.
Speaker1	She tried to help me build something inside myself, a sort of internal levee system to keep my mental machinations from flooding every adult conversation in the vicinity—not to mention the rare moments of peace that so seldom found purchase in our household of five children and counting.
Speaker1	Although it wasn’t a particular strength of hers, either, my mother worked diligently to teach me the art of holding my tongue, of knowing when to speak—and as with every challenge she faced, her tools of choice were found in the Bible, 1611 King James Authorized Version only.
Speaker1	“The tongue is a fire, a world of iniquity,” she would quote.
Speaker1	“But the tongue can no man tame; it is an unruly evil, full of deadly poison.”
Speaker1	These verses only served to confuse me for a number of years.
Speaker1	I wondered what was so “deadly” about my constant complaints about my four-year-old sister’s horrid behavior toward me.
Speaker1	I couldn’t see how my never-ending interrogations surrounding the puzzling characters we encountered on the picket line—“Karl the Fat Fag”—could ever be considered “iniquity.” No matter how much effort my mother invested in the construction of this system, my incipient levees failed miserably, washed away by the endless streams of syllables that surged from brain to open mouth with the force of a great deluge.
Speaker1	I wouldn’t have had the vocabulary or self-awareness to convey it at the time, but at the root of all my words was a pathological imperative that has never left me, one that continues to override the usual etiquette of distant, restrained discourse with strangers.
Speaker1	I was animated by a set of twin desires that I now understand will never be satisfied: the need to understand, and to be understood.
Speaker1	I grew up considering myself exceptionally fortunate to be surrounded by people who could help me on both of these counts.
Speaker1	Conversations with elementary school classmates taught me young that the Westboro way of life was not common—not just our daily protesting, but the fact that nine siblings had settled down in the immediate vicinity of their parents’ home, forming an exclusive, tight-knit community.
Speaker1	I pitied the poor chumps who were their parents’ only child and the ones with cousins flung halfway across the country—meanwhile, I had dozens living nearby.
Speaker1	My aunts and uncles were my teachers, and my cousins my confidants.
Speaker1	Who needed school friends when I had family?
Speaker1	There was always someone to talk with.
Speaker1	I never had to be alone.
Speaker1	My parents carefully avoided favoritism in our home, but I found myself unable to do the same when it came to my aunts.
Speaker1	They took turns cycling in and out of the top spot for various reasons.
Speaker1	Rachel was beautiful just like her biblical counterpart, and she shared sticks of mint gum in little foil packets.
Speaker1	She’d call me Mickey and find fun ways to teach me new skills—like how to make change while collecting Happy Meals in the drive-through at McDonald’s.
Speaker1	Lizz would let me sit in her pew during church sometimes, taking my hand firmly in hers whenever I’d get fidgety; she’d use the pad of her thumb to rub soothing little circles on the back of my hand, so that the move never felt like a punishment.
Speaker1	Becky had the most boisterous laugh, and before she got married, she’d come over to watch my siblings and me during the pickets when the weather was too cold for us to attend.
Speaker1	We’d play Farkle and crack up each time we’d accidentally-on-purpose call it “Fartle” instead.
Speaker1	Abi was the baby of my mother’s family, funny and crass.
Speaker1	We’d take turns massaging each other’s shoulders, and she’d remind me of how much I loved to have my hair washed as a baby.
Speaker1	How it was the one thing that never failed to calm me down.
Speaker1	Margie, though, would always be particularly special to me.
Speaker1	She’d been named for my grandmother, and I for the two of them, though I never used the name outside of official documents.
Speaker1	A good name is rather to be chosen than great riches, goes the Proverb, and I had one.
Speaker1	Nothing pleased me more than when Margie would drop by and scoop me up to run errands with her—to the bank, the post office, the grocery store, I took any and every chance I could have to be near her.
Speaker1	All the comparisons from my loved ones might have influenced me, but I recognized a kindred spirit in her.
Speaker1	She’d come in like a whirlwind, a bundle of energy enthusing about one topic or another, whatever she happened to be turning over in her mind in that moment.
Speaker1	An epiphany!
Speaker1	A revelation!
Speaker1	An unexpected turn of events in a case she was working!
Speaker1	Can you walk with her while she talks?
Speaker1	There’s so much to do, not a moment to spare!
Speaker1	Gran would jokingly ponder the absurdity that if Margie was able to speak her thoughts as rapidly as she did, how much faster must her mind be thinking them, unencumbered by the mechanical burden of forming sounds?
Speaker1	I say without conceit that this, too, was a problem I recognized.
Speaker1	It was a constant source of frustration that I could never make my mouth move fast enough to keep up with my thoughts—even when I was speaking at a pace that made my words unintelligible even to my own ears.
Speaker1	(I’m sure it was a still greater source of frustration to my mother.
Speaker1	“Would ya slow down, Meg?
Speaker1	!”)
Speaker1	Where my mom was Westboro’s logistical powerhouse, Margie was our legal one.
Speaker1	They had fallen into these positions in the most natural way possible—not by vote or by fiat, but simply by doing the work.
Speaker1	Their roles were dictated partly, even principally, by their place in the family lineup: following the common pattern, the heaviest responsibilities tended to fall to the older Phelps siblings.
Speaker1	When the second and third children abandoned the church as young adults, Margie and my mother were left to pick up the slack.
Speaker1	Their individual personalities played into the equation, too, of course.
Speaker1	My grandfather required much of his children and he held them to the highest of standards, even when society at large would have considered them either too young or too old to be commanded in such a fashion.
Speaker1	Other children might have chafed at his rigid requirements, but my mother seemed to have a perpetual sense of urgency about meeting them.
Speaker1	Her deep aversion to disappointing her father, her aptitude at pacifying him, and her willingness to use any means necessary to get her younger siblings on board with the program—including physical force, not unlike what my grandfather had modeled—these were the attributes that helped to mold my mother into a combination of something like a political whip and his girl Friday.
Speaker1	This is not to say that she was unaffected by her father’s severe treatment of their family.
Speaker1	She told me one day, laughing but abashed, that she and her siblings used to refer to their father as “T.B.” in the notes they left for one another at the law firm: “The Beast.” Still, the accounts I heard over the years from and about my mom left me with the knowledge that any such quiet dissent was about as far as she went in pushing back against his demands.
Speaker1	Many years would pass before I felt the least bit unsettled by the striking correlation between her view of her father and her view of God.
Speaker1	“You wanna sum up the whole Bible in just three words?” she would ask.
Speaker1	“‘Obey, obey, obey!’” It was an approach of appeasement: if only you could work hard enough to placate the strict demands of an exacting taskmaster, his wrath would turn away from you.
Speaker1	Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter: Fear God, and keep his commandments: for this is the whole duty of man.
Speaker1	For God shall bring every work into judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil.
Speaker1	Gramps was not God, but Westboro members were inclined to conflate the moral judgments of the two—in practice, if not in theory—because in spite of his faults, my grandfather had been chosen by God to lead us.
Speaker1	Who were we to question His choice?
Speaker1	By virtue of my grandfather’s onerous temperament and our family’s battles with the Kansas legal community, my mother had grown up in what she called a “pressure cooker”—the same phrase she would later use to describe our life working in Westboro’s “War Room,” as the office we shared had been dubbed.
Speaker1	The unrelenting pressure through the decades only fed her sense of urgency, and it seemed to have had the effect of making her the embodiment of every cliché about diamonds similarly pressured: hard, abrasive, brilliant.
Speaker1	My mother had an eye for identifying the roots of problems and their solutions, and she was almost ruthless in her pursuit of both—even when this meant mowing down our loved ones in the process.
Speaker1	Tender as her gentle teaching and sweet encouragement could be, her bitter reproaches at the slightest displeasure would bring me to my knees in a heap of desperate sobs on my bedroom floor, face pressed to the floor and tears sliding down my forehead as I prayed to the Lord for mercy, for Him to please just fix whatever was defective in me to have vexed my mother so.
Speaker1	In those moments of sorrowful prayer in my bedroom—despite all my efforts, why could I not just do things right?
Speaker1	What was wrong with me?—I was consumed by terror, frantic at the thought that I had been like Esau all along.
Speaker1	The man who found no place of repentance, though he sought it carefully with tears.
Speaker1	At each of my mother’s censures I stood on the edge of a precipice, feeling as if I were only a light breeze away from being pitched headlong into the waste howling wilderness of the world, forever cut off from God and His people—and then, finally, awakening to the torments of Hell.
Speaker1	Among Westboro members, such was the power of my mother’s judgment.
Speaker1	The loyal servant had assumed the role of the new taskmaster.
Speaker1	Margie was often the counterpoint to my mother’s abrasiveness.
Speaker1	Her finesse was evidence that she understood people in a way that my mother never seemed to.
Speaker1	One afternoon when Margie was picking me up from middle school, she told me a story that I would remember and attempt to emulate for years.
Speaker1	At a meeting with her team at the state Department of Corrections, there’d been a discussion surrounding a thorny question.
Speaker1	Margie had figured out the answer, but instead of saying so directly, she alluded to ideas that would lead the others in the right direction, giving them the space to work it out and come to a conclusion for themselves.
Speaker1	She described her decision to hold back as having two effects: her colleagues had the satisfaction of learning and meaningful accomplishment, and they were more invested in implementing the solution because they had come to it for themselves.
Speaker1	Had Margie’s coworkers been under Westboro’s authority, I knew my mother would have seen them as prideful for being at all swayed by their feelings; after all, they should be invested in the right answer for its own sake, not because they found it.
Speaker1	What vainglorious fools they must be!
Speaker1	She would have done her best to stamp out that pride forthwith: “You think you’ve got somethin’ goin’ on?
Speaker1	You think you know somethin’?
Speaker1	This is not about you!” Pride was a destructive force in any human being, and it needed to be eradicated at all costs.
Speaker1	Every one that is proud in heart is an abomination to the Lord.
Speaker1	But Margie had taken her employees into account—their personalities, how her conduct would affect them—and in her consideration I saw true humility, rather than just the absence of pride.
Speaker1	There was a peace in my aunt’s manner that appeared so much more desirable to my eye than the hard lines and harsh tones my mother so often took.
Speaker1	I aspired to many of my mother’s qualities—strength, diligence, zeal—but my aunt was a powerful introduction to the idea that these features did not require militancy to survive.
Speaker1	That strength abides as fully in restraint as it does in aggression.
Speaker1	That the tongue, that world of iniquity of which my mother had so strenuously warned me, could be used in altogether better ways.
Speaker1	By long forbearing is a prince persuaded, and a soft tongue breaketh the bone.
Speaker1	Although the idea of taking a gentler approach resonated with me relatively young, many years would pass before it had opportunity to bloom.
Speaker1	“Mildly” was not the way I had learned to speak to outsiders.
Speaker1	There would be no mincing of words on the picket line, no euphemisms, no delicacy, no circumlocution.
Speaker1	Westboro’s provocations would land us in litigation more than once—including, ultimately, a federal case that reached the United States Supreme Court and had the potential to bankrupt the church many times over—but not even this could convince us to change our ways.
Speaker1	Even as the church became more radical and adopted ever-harsher prayers wishing death upon a growing list of enemies, I understood the refusal to recalibrate.
Speaker1	One of the first verses I memorized was a command from God to the prophet Isaiah: Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice like a trumpet, and shew my people their transgression, and the house of Jacob their sins.
Speaker1	This had been the charge at my grandfather’s ordination at seventeen, and he quoted it ceaselessly—often in conjunction with another phrase he would bellow from the pulpit on Sunday mornings: “WE WERE NOT SENT HERE TO PARLEY!” Ours was a position of strength, our foundation Jesus Christ Himself.
Speaker1	Compromise was betrayal.
Speaker1	The thoughts of mere humans were irrelevant.
Speaker1	In this battle, we would not be the ones to yield.
Speaker1	For all her sophistication and emotional intelligence, not even Margie was above conforming to our antagonism on the picket line and was often cruder than most.
Speaker1	When I was nineteen, I stood with my aunt and my Gran on a street corner outside a Seattle hotel hosting an international gay and lesbian leadership conference.
Speaker1	With her then-eighty-one-year-old mother standing a few feet away, my aunt waxed vulgar, applying the knowledge Gramps had imparted to us about “scat”—the consumption of feces for sexual pleasure—to an anecdote about an imaginary new drink at Starbucks.
Speaker1	“Just go and get yourself a Fececcino!” she brayed, mocking the conference-goers in a tone of prissy faux-refinement.
Speaker1	“Add a dollop of feces into your coffee, and then prance in here to discuss your leadership!” The stark contrast between the way Margie behaved on and off the picket line was jarring even to me, but I was of the mind that the obscene nature of my aunt’s words said nothing about her and everything about gays: that they were disgusting and abominable whether she kept quiet about their manifestly abhorrent sex acts or not.
Speaker1	I supposed she felt the same.
Speaker1	Our antics at Westboro protests were vulnerable to criticism for any number of reasons, but their remarkable efficacy at garnering attention could never be gainsaid.
Speaker1	This was by design, of course; a major piece of the attraction of our un-church-like methods was the thunderous voice it gave us on the streets and in the media.
Speaker1	Both our picketing and the media coverage were finite and local in the very beginning, but my grandfather swiftly found ways to colonize the burgeoning power of the twenty-four-hour news cycle for his own purposes.
Speaker1	Westboro members began traveling across the country, from gay pride marches in D.C. to the Castro district in San Francisco.
Speaker1	Our vehement attacks on public and private figures nationwide were carried by fax machines, and later the Internet, to newsrooms across the country and around the world.
Speaker1	Westboro’s relationship with the media became symbiotic almost instantly: they gave attention to our message, and we helped them sell newspapers and generate clicks.
Speaker1	In our estimation, Westboro’s chief objective by far was fidelity to the Scriptures.
Speaker1	Apart from that, however, we gauged success primarily by the amount of media attention we received—a fact which garnered no shortage of accusations that we were feigning our faith for the sake of notoriety.
Speaker1	People often took our constant employment of shock tactics as cynical and purely attention-seeking behavior, but this was a fundamental misunderstanding of our purpose and the dynamics of the picket line.
Speaker1	“Some say you’re just doing this for attention,” one television reporter accused Gramps during an interview I sat in on.
Speaker1	My grandfather looked at her like she was uncommonly dense and said slowly, “Well, you’re doggone right.
Speaker1	How can I preach to ’em if I don’t have their attention?”
Speaker1	Not only did we firmly believe in the truth and goodness of all our message and methods—including what others wrote off as “shock tactics”—we also recognized that we were living in a sound-bite generation with endless demands on its attention.
Speaker1	“You’ve got to speak to people where they are!” my mother insisted.
Speaker1	We had a message to preach, and we were going to use every tool in our arsenal to get the job done: sexually explicit signs and insults, parodies and pop culture references, sarcasm and sass.
Speaker1	Margie was especially good at writing clever lyrics for our parodies of pop songs, which inspired me to try my hand at them, as well.
Speaker1	When we published the recordings of my Lady Gaga parodies on Twitter—Russian roulette is what you’re playin’, silly clod / But every chamber’s loaded when you’re playin’ with your God—her devoted and active fan base whipped themselves into a frenzy, turning our songs into an international news story.
Speaker1	No matter how fierce the hostility to our message became, we delivered it with a Cheshire grin: “You’re going to Hell.
Speaker1	Have a nice day!” It was important that people understood that our protests were not done in service of any personal hatred, but of the truth of God.
Speaker1	Our belief in predestination prevented us from using conversion numbers as a measure of our success—fortuitous, considering how paltry they were—because whether a person had the faith to believe the truth of our doctrines was in God’s hands alone.
Speaker1	In light of this, our goal was not to convert, but rather to preach to as many people as possible using all the means that God had put at our disposal.
Speaker1	He would take care of the rest.
Speaker1	And he said unto them, Go ye into all the world, and preach the gospel to every creature.
Speaker1	He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved; but he that believeth not shall be damned.
Speaker1	On the cusp of the twenty-first century, at the dawn of the Internet age, we saw ourselves as the recipients of a divine gift unlike any given to the faithful preachers of yore: a global communications system which we would swarm like a conquering army to spread the Word of God unchecked.
Speaker1	Selah.
Speaker1	“You think the Internet was created by God for these pornographers?” Gramps snorted.
Speaker1	“The heck you say.
Speaker1	He created it for us.
Speaker1	For our preaching.”
Speaker1	At first it was a trickle, but then they came in droves.
Speaker1	Small-town papers and local TV news segments gave way to Michael Moore’s The Awful Truth and ABC’s 20/20—the former featuring an enormous pink motor home announcing BUGGERY ON BOARD!
Speaker1	that Moore had dubbed the Sodomobile.
Speaker1	CNN.
Speaker1	Fox News.
Speaker1	MSNBC.
Speaker1	The BBC produced two hour-long documentaries about Westboro that identified us as “The Most Hated Family in America.” We were thrilled to see that our message was beginning to seep into the international conscience, our neon signs and provocative slogans becoming iconic and instantly recognizable.
Speaker1	HBO’s award-winning television drama True Blood was a pop-culture phenomenon from its inception through its conclusion in 2014, and for seven seasons, “God Hates Fangs” flashed through its opening credits—a play on Westboro’s infamous rallying cry, “God Hates Fags.” As Westboro’s profile continued to rise, the Phelps-Roper home became a revolving door of journalists and documentary filmmakers from across the United States, the U.K., Australia, Japan, Italy, France, Germany, and more.
Speaker1	A few weeks after my grandfather attacked the Swedish royal family following the sentencing of an anti-gay preacher there (“The King looks like an anal-copulator, and his grinning kids look slutty & gay!”), two journalists from Stockholm knocked on our kitchen door unannounced.
Speaker1	“Hello!” I smiled at the two gentlemen unfazed.
Speaker1	“Can I help you?”
Speaker1	Our campaign against Sweden only intensified when we discovered that the royal court was looking into possible legal action against us under their hate crimes law.
Speaker1	With this sort of attention, how could we let go?
Speaker1	We added GodHatesSweden.com to our growing list of Internet domains and attacked the country’s leader, Carl XVI Gustaf: “The popinjay King of Sweden—a moral titmouse in the plumage of a peacock, who lives lavishly with his kids on Sweden’s largest social security check—is King of Fags.” My grandfather spun out news releases, and we unleashed the power of our fax machines, sending the missives to every government-related number we could unearth.
Speaker1	“The Swedish Royal Court has confirmed that it has been receiving abusive faxes from the fanatical Westboro Baptist Church sect.” (#LedesFrom1991) The technology was antiquated even in 2007, and we found it hysterical that our ol’ Gramps could literally cut and paste together the elements of a press release, “send it out on that little machine,” and stir up the highest levels of the Swedish government.
Speaker1	The campaign wouldn’t be complete without protests, of course.
Speaker1	Our policy was not to leave the country and the protection of the First Amendment, but we were undeterred by our inability to travel to picket in Sweden.
Speaker1	Instead, we targeted the country through its D.C. embassy and consulates in Chicago, Omaha, Minneapolis, and Portland; the local performance of a Swedish chamber orchestra; a Kansas alcohol distributor whose wares included Absolut Vodka; and a Topeka hardware store that sold Swedish vacuum cleaners.