Speaker1	As I came to know him, it became clear that just about every part of his existence made our relationship so unlikely that it should have been impossible.
Speaker1	He had painstakingly built for himself a successful life and career, arranging it all to be as simple and quiet and predictable as possible.
Speaker1	Understanding how intensely he valued privacy, the lengths to which he went to eschew attention, how little of himself he tended to reveal to others, I couldn’t help but marvel that he had ever shared anything with me while I was still at Westboro.
Speaker1	He marveled, too, with that particular smile he’d get—awe mixed with disbelief—when he couldn’t seem to grasp the reality of us.
Speaker1	“Why are you here?” he’d balk, searching my face as if an answer might be discovered in the blue of an iris or the curve of a cheekbone.
Speaker1	“How?”
Speaker1	That question became my obsession, too, and the further I ventured from the constraints of Westboro’s belief system, the more I found myself looking back across what seemed to be an ever-widening gulf, wondering how others might be able to traverse it.
Speaker1	I remembered how much sense the church’s beliefs had made to me while I was a member, and became fixated on trying to pinpoint exactly where Westboro’s error lay—and most important, how to communicate my changing perspective to my family in a way that they could hear, and wouldn’t just dismiss out of hand.
Speaker1	I read through their tweets and sermons compulsively, challenging myself to articulate both sides of the argument: why Westboro held each of their positions, and why I no longer did.
Speaker1	In some cases, the distance between us felt too vast to even make an attempt at persuasion—rushing directly into casting doubt on a literal interpretation of the Bible, for instance, would certainly go nowhere.
Speaker1	Instead, I let my arguments be guided by the pattern that had worked with me, with Dustin and Laura, and with others whose stories I was coming to learn: the discovery of internal inconsistency and hypocrisy as an important first step in seeing outside of group dogma.
Speaker1	Though my arguments largely went unanswered, I made them to Westboro members via interviews, on Twitter, and through private messages.
Speaker1	Coming up against their wall of certainty was often a frustrating and painful exercise, and not just because of the callousness and condescension that so often filled their rhetoric.
Speaker1	At Westboro, any admission that we might be wrong about any doctrine was accompanied by intense shame and fear.
Speaker1	If we reversed course on any issue, we did so quietly, never admitting publicly to our mistakes.
Speaker1	From our point of view, acknowledging error and ignorance was anathema, because doing so would cast doubt on our message.
Speaker1	While I engaged church members as an outsider, I started to understand that doubt was the point—that it was the most basic shift in how I experienced the world.
Speaker1	Doubt was nothing more than epistemological humility: a deep and practical awareness that outside our sphere of knowledge there existed information and experiences that might show our position to be in error.
Speaker1	Doubt causes us to hold a strong position a bit more loosely, such that an acknowledgment of ignorance or error doesn’t crush our sense of self or leave us totally unmoored if our position proves untenable.
Speaker1	Certainty is the opposite: it hampers inquiry and hinders growth.
Speaker1	It teaches us to ignore evidence that contradicts our ideas, and encourages us to defend our position at all costs, even as it reveals itself as indefensible.
Speaker1	Certainty sees compromise as weak, hypocritical, evil, suppressing empathy and allowing us to justify inflicting horrible pain on others.
Speaker1	Doubt wasn’t the sin, I came to believe.
Speaker1	It was the arrogance of certainty that poisoned Westboro at its foundations.
Speaker1	Whenever friends and family expressed concern about my continued focus on the church and the past, I would gently dismiss them—but inwardly, I began to wonder if my identity would be forever tied to Westboro.
Speaker1	Would I ever be truly free of it?
Speaker1	Should I be doing more to try to extract myself from anything related to them?
Speaker1	For several reasons, I ultimately answered these questions with an emphatic no.
Speaker1	First, when I stopped to consider the idea, I realized that I didn’t want to be free of them—and that it didn’t seem possible anyway, not without rewriting or erasing most of my history.
Speaker1	Attempting to do so would have been inauthentic, the denial of a truth that David had been quick to recognize and point out: that the church had made me who I was, including many of the best parts of me.
Speaker1	“You left out of principle,” David had told Grace and me, “pretty much the same principles you were raised with.
Speaker1	And your departure was both a rejection and an affirmation of everything you were taught.
Speaker1	You are your parents’ children.” Weeping, I had asked him how he could possibly say such a thing.
Speaker1	We were betrayers.
Speaker1	“In a way,” he said, “leaving Westboro Baptist Church was the most Westboro Baptist Church thing you could have done.
Speaker1	They’re the ones who taught you to stand up for what you believe in, no matter what it cost you.
Speaker1	They taught you that.
Speaker1	They just never imagined you’d be standing up to them.”
Speaker1	I also fundamentally disagreed with the characterization that I was “focused on the past.” Though I occasionally found myself litigating old grievances, my examinations of the past felt urgent precisely because this was a present and future issue.
Speaker1	My family remained stuck in a pattern of thinking and behavior that inflicted unnecessary harm on themselves and on the communities they continued to target every single day.
Speaker1	As someone who had contributed to that harm for so long, I felt an obligation to those communities to work to dismantle it from the outside.
Speaker1	As the longtime recipient of so much love, attention, and care from my family, for me to simply abandon them seemed like the height of ingratitude, a failure to reflect the kind of person my parents raised me to be: strong in the face of difficulties, willing to do hard things and make sacrifices for those I love.
Speaker1	And as someone who had learned to see Westboro’s ideology from both sides of the divide, I couldn’t help feeling that it would be an abdication of responsibility and the waste of a gift to turn my back on a problem into which I may have some useful insight.
Speaker1	I didn’t want to become the embodiment of the example from the book of James: For if any be a hearer of the word, and not a doer, he is like unto a man beholding his natural face in a glass: For he beholdeth himself, and goeth his way, and straightway forgetteth what manner of man he was.
Speaker1	To have been transformed by the gentle, persistent entreaties of strangers—and then to walk away and forget that example, to refuse to extend that same courtesy and grace to others?
Speaker1	Brutish.
Speaker1	But perhaps the most important reason I couldn’t just leave it all behind was the lesson that began to crystallize in my mind from my very first night in Deadwood, talking with Cora at the bar inside the Four Aces Casino:
Speaker1	Westboro is not unique.
Speaker1	The church’s garish signs lend themselves to this view of its members as crazed doomsayers, cartoonish villains who celebrate the calamities of others with fiendish glee.
Speaker1	But the truth is that the church’s radical, recalcitrant position is the result of very common, very human forces—everything from fear, family, guilt, and shame, to cognitive dissonance and confirmation bias.
Speaker1	These are forces whose power affects us all, consciously and subconsciously, to one degree or another at every stage of our lives.
Speaker1	And when these forces are coupled with group dynamics and a belief system that caters to so many of our most basic needs as human beings—a sense of meaning, of identity, of purpose, of reward, of goodness, of community—they provide group members with an astonishing level of motivation to cohere and conform, no matter the cost.
Speaker1	Others with stories like mine have shown me repeatedly that the root of Westboro’s ideology—the idea that our beliefs were “the one true way”—is not by any means limited to Westboro members.
Speaker1	In truth, that idea is common, widespread, and on display everywhere humans gather, from religious circles to political ones.
Speaker1	It gives a comforting sense of certainty, freeing the believer from existential angst and providing a sense of stability—a foundation on which to build a life.
Speaker1	But the costs of that certainty can be enormous and difficult to identify.
Speaker1	Ultimately, the same quality that makes Westboro so easy to dismiss—its extremism—is also what helps highlight the destructive nature of viewing the world in black and white, the danger of becoming calcified in a position and impervious to change.
Speaker1	Though their ideologies manifested in vastly different ways, it was fundamentalist religious groups, from Jehovah’s Witnesses to members of the Islamic State, that first permitted me to recognize the patterns of my upbringing.
Speaker1	But as I watch the human tribal instinct play out in the era of Donald Trump, the echoes of Westboro are undeniable: the division of the world into Us and Them; the vilification of compromise; the knee-jerk expulsion of insiders who violate group orthodoxy; and the demonization of outsiders and the inability to substantively engage with their ideas, because we simply cannot step outside of our own.
Speaker1	In this environment, there is a growing insistence that opposing views must be silenced, whether by the powers of government, the self-regulation of social media companies, or the self-censorship of individuals.
Speaker1	At the heart of this insistence lie several false assumptions, including a sentiment that Westboro members would readily recognize: We have nothing to learn from these people.
Speaker1	This sentiment was troubling to witness even among our tiny fringe movement, and I was relieved to abandon it when I left the church—but watching it spread among a vast and growing populace has been altogether more alarming, filling me with a growing sense of unease.
Speaker1	Another assumption gaining particular traction is that refusing to grant mainstream platforms to hated ideas will halt their spread.
Speaker1	While the desire to shield people from these ideas is well-intentioned and completely understandable, I can’t help but see it as a fundamentally flawed strategy, one that ignores the practicalities of human nature.
Speaker1	The fact is that people come to embrace these ideas in a multitude of ways: some argue themselves into destructive beliefs; others come to them as I did, taught by parents and loved ones; still others find them in books, films, and the annals of history.
Speaker1	Especially in the age of the Internet, it seems clear that we cannot reasonably expect to permanently halt the spread of an idea, whether good or bad.
Speaker1	What we can do, however, is foster a culture in which we have the language to articulate and defend sound arguments as to why certain ideas are harmful, the precise ways in which they’re flawed, and the suffering they have caused in the past.
Speaker1	Although private companies like Twitter and Facebook are clearly free to set the terms of use for their platforms, the principles enshrined in the First Amendment are no less relevant to social media than they are in public spaces: that open discourse and dialectic is the most effective enabler of the evolution of individuals and societies.
Speaker1	That the answer to bad ideas is to publicly reason against them, to advocate for and propagate better ones.
Speaker1	And that it is dangerous to vest any central authority with broad powers to limit the bounds of acceptable discussion—because these powers lend themselves to authoritarian abuse, the creation of echo chambers, and the marginalization of ideas that are true but unpopular.
Speaker1	In short, the principles underlying the freedom of speech recognize that all of us are susceptible to cognitive deficiencies and groupthink, and that an open marketplace of ideas is our best defense against them.
Speaker1	And though my life’s trajectory has led me to strongly believe in these principles, I continue to actively seek out, examine, and seriously consider the arguments of those who oppose them.
Speaker1	To my mind, this is the essence of epistemological humility—not a lack of belief or principle or faith, not the refusal to take a position or the abdication of responsibility to stand against injustice, but a constant examination of one’s worldview, a commitment to honestly grappling with criticisms of it.
Speaker1	Along with so many others, I now watch the increasing hostility and hysteria of our modern political discourse and wonder how we, as a society, might change course.
Speaker1	I consider the impending arrival of the baby girl I will shortly bring into the world with Chad—now, impossibly, my husband—and wonder how we’ll teach her to avoid falling into these destructive patterns in her own life.
Speaker1	And though my experiences at Westboro would have been sufficient on their own to fix these questions in my mind, nothing has made me pursue them with greater urgency than witnessing the devastating end of my beloved Gramps.
Speaker1	One year after my appearance at the Jewlicious Festival, I was back with David in Los Angeles for another.
Speaker1	My phone rang, and the voice on the other end of the line was my brother Zach, recently departed from Westboro.
Speaker1	The tears running down my face were a mixture of happiness at having my brother back, and grief at the thought of my parents and siblings facing yet another void in the Phelps-Roper family.
Speaker1	Another empty room in the home we’d shared for so long.
Speaker1	I asked my brother the eternal question—Why?—and listened as he described a disillusionment that was achingly familiar to me.
Speaker1	But I had another question.
Speaker1	“Zach, what’s going on with Gramps?
Speaker1	I’ve been checking the church website for months, and he hasn’t been giving any sermons.
Speaker1	Is he okay?”
Speaker1	My brother’s voice dropped almost to a whisper.
Speaker1	“Well … he … uh…” Zach stammered.
Speaker1	“He’s in hospice.”
Speaker1	My heart stopped.
Speaker1	My grandfather had believed that he was never going to die.
Speaker1	That Jesus would return and bring him to Glory before that could ever happen.
Speaker1	He’d said it so often that it seemed a foregone conclusion even then, even though I scarcely believed in God anymore.
Speaker1	“… and he was voted out of the church.”
Speaker1	Neither of us said anything for a few minutes as I sobbed at the image of my grandfather sick and dying and alone in a hospice bed.
Speaker1	At the unparalleled cruelty of my family, which had somehow grown even worse since my departure, consuming even Gramps himself.
Speaker1	But if ye bite and devour one another, take heed that ye be not consumed one of another.
Speaker1	I had been pacing the sidewalk in front of the Booksteins’ home, walking across the elaborate chalk paintings that Grace and I had done with their children.
Speaker1	The same sorts of drawings we’d done with my siblings, cousins, nieces, and nephew back in Topeka.
Speaker1	I sank to the ground, pants covered in chalk, face covered with tears, ignoring the stares from groups of twelve-year-old Jewish girls walking by in their long skirts and opaque tights.
Speaker1	And again, I put the question to my brother.
Speaker1	Why?
Speaker1	I disconnected the call a few minutes later and returned to the Booksteins’ Shabbat table, sitting across from David.
Speaker1	“What’s wrong?” he asked immediately.
Speaker1	I shook my head, unable to speak.
Speaker1	“Would it make you happy if something bad happened to my Gramps?” I finally managed to choke out.
Speaker1	I hoped the answer was no.
Speaker1	I thought it would be.
Speaker1	I knew that my Gramps had taught us to celebrate the tragedies of our enemies—that many would see this outcome as his just comeuppance—but that very idea was one of the reasons I had left Westboro.
Speaker1	I couldn’t bear the thought of anyone celebrating this.
Speaker1	Especially a good friend.
Speaker1	“Of course not!” David insisted.
Speaker1	“Why would I be happy?” When I told him what had happened, he said he would pray for my Gramps.
Speaker1	And when he returned home to Jerusalem the following week, he would go to the Wailing Wall and put a note in it asking God to help my Gramps.
Speaker1	“I hope and pray he gets well.”
Speaker1	Instead of returning to my new home with Chad in South Dakota, I flew to Kansas with Grace, terrified that Gramps would pass before we had a chance to see him.
Speaker1	Zach had given us the name of the hospice, and I knew that our best chance at seeing our grandfather would be to show up unannounced.
Speaker1	As in the months before I left Westboro, I hated the sneaking around.
Speaker1	The church would not want us to see him, and my fear of defying them was still almost paralyzing—but we were his grandchildren.
Speaker1	We were his family, too.
Speaker1	The miles from Kansas City to Topeka passed in the snowy darkness of midnight, Grace sleeping in the passenger seat as I made my case, my inner monologue growing more outraged by the second.
Speaker1	The people charged with my grandfather’s care had cast him out of their family—out of his own church—after all these years.
Speaker1	They had isolated him in his most vulnerable hours after a lifetime surrounded by his wife, children, grandchildren, and great-grandchildren.