Speaker1	It was an obvious point, but it suddenly struck me that this Us/Them mindset was deeply ingrained and resistant to change.
Speaker1	Unless I wanted to be forever ruled by a nebulous fear of outsiders, it wasn’t enough for me just to cross that line a few times; I needed to decide whether the line should be moved, or changed, or erased entirely.
Speaker1	It couldn’t be a simple matter of a blanket rejection of my former beliefs, either, which would be no less silly and irrational than unquestioning acceptance of them.
Speaker1	Instead, I would need to look at the evidence.
Speaker1	I’d need to carefully examine each of these thought patterns, holdovers from Westboro that would have to be challenged and reconsidered—over and over again—if there was any hope for lasting change.
Speaker1	Prove all things; hold fast that which is good.
Speaker1	I thought about the last time we’d heard from Nana—a birthday card she’d sent to Grace back in October.
Speaker1	I had felt so sad for her, ignored by our family for years on end.
Speaker1	Happy birthday, Grace, she’d written.
Speaker1	I’ll bet you are growing up beautiful.
Speaker1	Wish I could hear from someone.
Speaker1	I love you.
Speaker1	As little as I’d seen Nana, she hadn’t missed sending us birthday cards in all my years.
Speaker1	Like my mother, I had seen her efforts as a pitiful substitute for having a real presence in our lives, but now the gesture seemed like determined persistence—an effort to maintain an open door despite my parents’ attempts to seal all doors shut.
Speaker1	Nana had been trying to show that she loved us, even though she couldn’t be around us.
Speaker1	“I think I want to call Nana now,” I said to Grace.
Speaker1	She nodded.
Speaker1	What was there to stop me from picking up the phone that instant?
Speaker1	I got her phone number from Josh and began to pace an empty room filled with slot machines, tuning out their jingles as the phone began to ring.
Speaker1	“Hello?”
Speaker1	“Hi, Nana … this is Megan.”
Speaker1	“Hello!” she said.
Speaker1	“Megan who?”
Speaker1	I winced.
Speaker1	The moment I clarified that I was her granddaughter, Nana started to cry—and all the harder when I explained that Grace had left, too.
Speaker1	“I have been waiting for you grandchildren for years,” she said.
Speaker1	“Decades.
Speaker1	Megan.
Speaker1	I never thought it would be you.”
Speaker1	“I didn’t, either,” I told her truthfully.
Speaker1	Listening to my grandmother describe her years of struggle and sadness, I began to see the lasting effects of Westboro’s treatment of outsiders.
Speaker1	Nana’s pain didn’t come from a one-time decision to keep her at arm’s length and out of our lives, but from a continuing and active rejection—from watching the years of her life tick by without the love of her family.
Speaker1	Nana had been living this nightmare for more than thirty years.
Speaker1	The pain was ongoing.
Speaker1	I wondered how I would ever bear it.
Speaker1	Dec. 20, 2012—Day 3
Speaker1	THE SUN ALSO RISES
Speaker1	Wonderful how one loses track of the days up here in the mountains.
Speaker1	Time slowed to a crawl in Deadwood.
Speaker1	The hours stretched out endlessly before me, and on the good days, I couldn’t get enough.
Speaker1	After year upon year of constant churning and contention, I began to relish the quiet.
Speaker1	I would take the day’s reading to the fluffy green couch by the huge window in the living room—a single pane, so it was a view unbroken—but I’d often end up spending more time staring out the window than at the page, watching the snow blanket my car and the neighborhood and the pine forests farther up the hill.
Speaker1	When Grace was ready for chocolate or an adventure, I would happily indulge.
Speaker1	I loved seeing where her whims would take us.
Speaker1	Donning thrift store wedding dresses for an impromptu photo shoot at Deadwood Dick’s Antiques.
Speaker1	Watching students put the finishing touches on the life-sized log cabin they were building in shop class during a drop-in tour of the local high school.
Speaker1	Wading through knee-high drifts of immaculate snow along a creek in Spearfish Canyon, where the echoing snarls of a pack of dogs—another possible instrument of God’s wrath?—suddenly broke the silence and sent us hightailing it back to the car.
Speaker1	Taking care of my sister gave me purpose.
Speaker1	I knew I couldn’t give her what she truly wanted—the return of our beloved family—but after all we had lost, I wanted to offer consolation however I could.
Speaker1	“No!” Grace objected playfully one evening.
Speaker1	We’d been reading by lamplight in the attic, and she had just hauled her huge old, clunky, barely functioning typewriter across the room, setting it down eleven inches from my face.
Speaker1	After several minutes of poking and grumbling and paper-loading and reloading and random dings later, I moved toward the door to find a quieter space.
Speaker1	“You can’t leave me!
Speaker1	You’ll be reading to the sound of my typewriter!
Speaker1	It will be so poetic.
Speaker1	In Deadwood.”
Speaker1	“Everything is poetic in Deadwood,” I told her, laughing, but settled back down to read.
Speaker1	“I’m writing that down,” she declared.
Speaker1	She continued noisily pecking away for a few moments and then apologized.
Speaker1	“I want to write these thoughts as I have them,” she said by way of explanation.
Speaker1	I considered.
Speaker1	“I like to think about my thoughts before I have them.”
Speaker1	She laughed again.
Speaker1	“I’m writing that down, too!” Her delight was contagious.
Speaker1	But it wasn’t enough.
Speaker1	The bad days—the ones where Grace would refuse to speak to me, behaving as though she didn’t see me, couldn’t hear me—began to multiply.
Speaker1	The smallest of disagreements could grow into a days-long episode of the silent treatment, and I struggled to understand why my sister was so upset with me.
Speaker1	If I didn’t immediately get on board with her ideas—like the indefinite trip to France—she would insist that I was impossibly selfish and didn’t care about her.
Speaker1	If I offered an explanation for my disagreements, then I was simply “justifying myself” and not listening to her.
Speaker1	And then there was Chad.
Speaker1	He had reappeared a few days before I left Westboro, and we’d been in touch ever so cautiously—and only via text message—ever since.
Speaker1	He explained his sudden and protracted absence in a way that both relieved my hurt and made my heart ache: he’d been fevered and immobile for weeks, after he’d managed to contract both mononucleosis and West Nile virus simultaneously.
Speaker1	He had almost died.
Speaker1	Our communication had been as tentative as ever, due in part to a new anxiety he harbored: that I might suddenly show up on his doorstep unannounced.
Speaker1	As unpracticed as I was in the art of “normal” relationships, I was under no illusions that such a move would be a good idea.
Speaker1	He telegraphed his reticence just as clearly as he had his care.
Speaker1	There was that small part of me that delighted in the idea of our being in the same state, but South Dakota was vast.
Speaker1	In Deadwood, I was nearly as far from Chad’s home as I had been back in Kansas.
Speaker1	And when I told him about our plans to run away and read books, I didn’t tell him where we were going.
Speaker1	I wasn’t going to make a fool of myself.
Speaker1	By the time I arrived in Deadwood, Chad and I were back to texting nearly every day, though still cautiously.
Speaker1	He was curious about what I was doing and thinking, wondering how I was adjusting to life on the outside.
Speaker1	His queries seemed like a test sometimes, and at the heart of each stood a single question: Did I really belong outside of Westboro’s fences?
Speaker1	When he finally asked me where we had chosen for our reading quest, I told him the truth with studied nonchalance.
Speaker1	“Enjoy Deadwood,” he answered.
Speaker1	“I’ll be out there sometime after Christmas.
Speaker1	I’ll try to look you up.
Speaker1	Until then.” My whole body hummed with excitement, but when Grace caught me grinning stupidly at my phone, she was angry.
Speaker1	She never had to ask when it was Chad I was messaging, and she seemed to have an uncanny ability to intuit when I was just thinking of him.
Speaker1	She didn’t like that I wanted to share so many things with him, and told me that his influence had bothered her for a long time.
Speaker1	“I can’t help but think he poisoned a part of you,” she wrote.
Speaker1	She suspected that he was the cause of my initial doubts.
Speaker1	Reading Grace’s message, I was overcome by a powerful sense of denial.
Speaker1	No, no, no.
Speaker1	We were never supposed to be influenced by outsiders, and that idea had been a constant refrain at Westboro since I was small.
Speaker1	“These people have nothing to offer us!” we would say, a sentiment often accompanied by a dismissive sneer.
Speaker1	God instructed us to stand fast and hold the line against evildoers.
Speaker1	Behold, I have made thy face strong against their faces, and thy forehead strong against their foreheads.
Speaker1	As an adamant harder than flint have I made thy forehead: fear them not, neither be dismayed at their looks, though they be a rebellious house.
Speaker1	I was revolted by the thought that I had let an outsider affect me.
Speaker1	It made me feel weak and vulnerable.
Speaker1	Corrupted.
Speaker1	I responded to Grace’s assertion with a slew of words about the church’s cruelty and doctrinal errors—but the more I tried to frame the words to insist that Chad’s arguments had not influenced me, the clearer it became that my sister was right, at least in part.
Speaker1	MEGAN: And Gracie—assuming for a second that he *did* poison a part of me, I can only see one possibility.
Speaker1	I can see one thing that I lost (though I believe this process started way before Chad).
Speaker1	If the thing he poisoned was my ability to go along with something even if I disagreed with it—if he killed my ability to ignore and turn away from my conscience—then I’m glad he poisoned it.
Speaker1	GRACE: I will never like him.
Speaker1	Although I tried to respond to my sister’s moods with gentleness and restraint, reason and logic, my efforts often failed spectacularly.
Speaker1	A tsunami of rage, pain, confusion, and despair would engulf us both as we exploded at each other, storming off to far-flung corners of the inn with venom coursing through us.
Speaker1	It was fast becoming clear that we had no idea how to navigate relationships outside the church’s black-and-white, all-or-nothing paradigm.
Speaker1	I’d thought that going through this process with a most beloved sister might make things easier—and it did, in some ways—but leaving together had also created a situation I hadn’t foreseen.
Speaker1	With two of us, the mental, emotional, and logistical struggles of starting life again, almost from scratch, were concentrated and compounded.
Speaker1	We had never learned how to “agree to disagree,” because to church members, such a concept was blasphemous.
Speaker1	Can two walk together, except they be agreed?
Speaker1	What communion hath light with darkness?
Speaker1	At Westboro, every decision had moral implications.
Speaker1	Every question had a single correct answer.
Speaker1	Miscommunication required blame, and mistakes required punishment.
Speaker1	My sister and I knew how to cajole, issue ultimatums, attribute ill motives, and assign moral failure to the other party in a dispute, but we couldn’t compromise and we couldn’t move forward without a resolution as to which of us was in the wrong.
Speaker1	Without an absolute authority who could resolve the problem and declare one side as just and righteous, we floundered.
Speaker1	“Are you … okay?”
Speaker1	Curled up on the couch in the parlor, I glanced up to see Laura’s tiny frame in the doorway, barely visible in the dwindling light coming in from the west window.
Speaker1	She and Dustin had been out of town for several days, visiting her family for Christmas, and her presence here on Christmas Eve surprised me.
Speaker1	Why are they home already?
Speaker1	I hadn’t even heard her come in.
Speaker1	I swiped at my swollen eyes and tried to reassure her that I was fine, but I choked on another sob instead.
Speaker1	She sat down and tentatively put an arm around my shoulder.
Speaker1	I briefly debated an attempt to preserve my dignity and walk away, but the last remains of my life were falling apart.
Speaker1	What did I have to lose?
Speaker1	“She won’t talk to me!” I wailed.
Speaker1	“I don’t know what to do!”
Speaker1	I wasn’t sure what I expected Laura to say.
Speaker1	I just knew that I couldn’t stand another second of this solitary confinement.
Speaker1	I needed my mother—but in her absence, I needed anyone.
Speaker1	Laura shushed me and rubbed comforting circles on my back while I calmed down.
Speaker1	“Do you want to have dinner with Dustin and me?” she asked.
Speaker1	I followed Laura into the kitchen, watching as she and Dustin maneuvered around the small space, chopping herbs and vegetables for some sort of soup.
Speaker1	I had assumed they found it burdensome to have two guests puttering around their house, but they both seemed perfectly at ease with an emotional stranger recovering from a crying jag at their kitchen table.
Speaker1	Dustin explained that they loved to travel and to meet new people, but since full-time jobs now made such excursions difficult, hosting guests was the best alternative.
Speaker1	Laura waxed eloquent describing their experiences studying abroad—she in Belgium and the Netherlands, he at Oxford—and it was obvious that she missed the freedom and adventure.
Speaker1	When I’d regained full possession of my composure, Laura tactfully probed the cause of my distress.
Speaker1	I was evasive, but explained that my sister’s lack of communication wasn’t really her fault.
Speaker1	That we had just moved out of our lifelong home, and that our family wasn’t speaking to us anymore.
Speaker1	“Can I ask why?” Laura said gently.
Speaker1	I paused.
Speaker1	Talking with Cora and Ryan at the bar was one thing, but Grace and I were living with these people.
Speaker1	What if I told the truth and their response was outrage and anger?
Speaker1	I knew such a response would be justified, but I didn’t want to risk it.
Speaker1	“We don’t agree with their religion,” I hedged.
Speaker1	They both nodded, and an inscrutable look passed between them.
Speaker1	As we loaded the dishwasher after dinner, Laura offered me another room—the old library on the first floor—to take some of the pressure off Grace and me.
Speaker1	“For free?” I blurted.
Speaker1	“Thank you!”
Speaker1	She laughed.
Speaker1	“No problem.
Speaker1	Goodnight, Megan.”
Speaker1	A split second before I stepped into the kitchen the following morning, I realized the date and felt a surge of panic.
Speaker1	What am I going to say when they say, “Merry Christmas”?
Speaker1	!
Speaker1	After all the years of picketing Christmas services, of singing our version of “Santa Claus Is Coming to Town” (“Santa Claus Will Take You to Hell”), of listening to my mother read to us of the holiday’s pagan roots, and of reciting from the book of Jeremiah to passersby—For the customs of the people are vain: for one cutteth a tree out of the forest, the work of the hands of the workman, with the axe.
Speaker1	They deck it with silver and with gold; they fasten it with nails and with hammers, that it move not … they are altogether brutish and foolish: the stock is a doctrine of vanities … After all these years, my abhorrence of Christmas was visceral, and the thought of trying to frame the words “Merry Christmas” made me physically ill.
Speaker1	I could ignore the shop clerks and Salvation Army bell ringers, of course, but I was a guest here.
Speaker1	“Good morning!” Dustin said brightly.
Speaker1	I’m sure my face projected “deer in headlights,” but he was standing at the counter working the contents of a mixing bowl.
Speaker1	“Waffles,” he explained.
Speaker1	“Laura will be down in a few minutes.” He wrinkled his nose and lowered his voice: “She’s not a morning person, but my waffles should do the trick.”
Speaker1	When Laura trudged in a minute later, there was no sign of the chipper, friendly host from the evening before.
Speaker1	She was still in pajamas, eyes half-closed, mouth half-open, and literally dragging her feet.
Speaker1	She pulled a chair from the table and dragged it to the open heat register that I’d discovered on my first morning here, so that the warm air blew up her pajama pants.
Speaker1	Her mannerisms and short stature put me in mind of a small child, and I couldn’t stop myself from laughing out loud.
Speaker1	Dustin joined me.
Speaker1	“Dustin makes the best waffles,” she moaned with a sigh.
Speaker1	“That’s the only reason I’m not in bed.”
Speaker1	“It’ll be an easy day, anyway,” Dustin assured her, and then to me: “We’re just gonna watch Lord of the Rings movies all day.
Speaker1	It’s an annual marathon.
Speaker1	You’re welcome to join us.”
Speaker1	Laura was right about the waffles—copious amounts of real butter were the key, Dustin confided—but before I joined the movie marathon, I decided to test the waters with Grace.
Speaker1	I returned to the attic to grab a change of clothes, my toothbrush, and a blanket, and though my sister was sitting in bed awake, she said nothing.
Speaker1	She didn’t look up, studiously staring down at her phone.
Speaker1	No rapprochement in sight.
Speaker1	I made my way back down to the living room, wrapped myself in the blanket—all three of us had the same idea; the house was freezing—and I settled in on the smaller couch.
Speaker1	Only the extended versions of the films would suffice for this pair of self-professed nerds, so The Fellowship of the Ring ran for nearly four hours.
Speaker1	We had to keep pausing the action so they could explain more about this world of elves, dwarfs, wizards, and hobbits, but they didn’t seem to mind.
Speaker1	As the credits began to roll, I remembered the holiday and looked around.
Speaker1	Not only had there been no “Merry Christmas,” there was no tree, no red and green lights, no decorations, nothing.
Speaker1	Curious.
Speaker1	When I asked why, Dustin told me that they were Jehovah’s Witnesses and thus didn’t observe holidays that weren’t sanctioned by the Bible.
Speaker1	That was why they had returned home on Christmas Eve: they’d been visiting Laura’s parents and couldn’t celebrate with them without running afoul of God and conscience.
Speaker1	My relief was palpable.
Speaker1	“Oh!” I said.
Speaker1	“We’ve never celebrated Christmas, either!”
Speaker1	“Really?” he asked.
Speaker1	“What religion is it again?”
Speaker1	“Baptist,” I said.
Speaker1	“Don’t Baptists celebrate Christmas?” Laura asked.
Speaker1	“Not … our church.”
Speaker1	Dustin’s brow furrowed, and they both nodded.
Speaker1	“Well,” he said, “should we pause for lunch?”
Speaker1	What I actually wanted was to spend the rest of the day firing questions at them.
Speaker1	What did they believe?
Speaker1	And why?
Speaker1	How had they chosen to become Jehovah’s Witnesses?
Speaker1	If they took instruction from the Bible, why had Laura’s beautiful dark curls been chopped?
Speaker1	What about the passage that clearly requires long hair for women and short hair for men?
Speaker1	Doth not even nature itself teach you, that, if a man have long hair, it is a shame unto him?
Speaker1	But if a woman have long hair, it is a glory to her: for her hair is given her for a covering.
Speaker1	I managed to suppress my curiosity at first, but as the day wore on and we became more at ease with each other, I couldn’t help bringing the conversation back to religion.
Speaker1	I tried to assume the role of objective observer, but I found it impossible to discuss the Floyds’ beliefs without contrasting them to my former tradition—and since Westboro’s beliefs and practices were so unusual and well-known, it didn’t take them long to guess which church I might be describing.
Speaker1	As with Cora and the dealers at the Four Aces, I was surprised again at how understanding of my past Dustin and Laura seemed to be.
Speaker1	Instead of anger or judgment, it was fast friendship that resulted from our opening up to one another.
Speaker1	For the next several days, we spent every spare moment we could find together, talking about belief during their lunch hour, chopping vegetables for dinner, and sitting around the living room afterward with Bibles and Web browsers at the ready.
Speaker1	When communications with Grace thawed again—always a mysterious but welcome process—she joined the discussion, as well.
Speaker1	It would have been easy to spend all our days talking about theology, but Laura suggested we take our conversation on the road so that we wouldn’t sit at the inn and miss the beauty of the Hills.
Speaker1	At Mount Rushmore National Memorial, Laura pointed out an old educational video featuring the fathers of both of our hosts—Dustin’s had been the first employee of the Mount Rushmore Society, and Laura’s had been the superintendent here for nearly two decades, later moving to Yellowstone National Park.
Speaker1	“I was born in Yellowstone when my dad was an employee there,” she said.
Speaker1	“He’s the superintendent now.
Speaker1	That’s where we went to visit my parents last week.”
Speaker1	Laura explained that her decision to become a Jehovah’s Witness in college had put a strain on her relationship with her parents and siblings.
Speaker1	She’d been raised Presbyterian and was inspired to convert by Dustin, a longtime friend and love interest who had grown up in the faith.
Speaker1	Like members of Westboro, Witnesses are instructed to date and marry only those who share their beliefs—but Laura hadn’t blindly converted for her future husband.
Speaker1	Instead, she had carefully studied with Witnesses for four years before deciding to seek baptism and membership in the organization.
Speaker1	Although her parents had responded in different ways, both were hurt by her decision.
Speaker1	Her father was stoic, but her mother’s pain manifested in occasional angry lamentations about the things Laura would be missing: participating in non-Witness religious ceremonies like weddings and baptisms, and celebrations of holidays and birthdays—important milestones in the life of their family.
Speaker1	Laura’s beliefs now spurned the traditions that brought her family together, and inherently judged non-Witnesses as wrongdoers.
Speaker1	“I became something ‘Outside’ in my family,” Laura told me later.
Speaker1	“Being present at family gatherings that centered around holidays felt like being a vegan at a meat feast.
Speaker1	No one can figure out exactly why this person is here, and are they really just going to stand over the meatballs and judge us?”
Speaker1	In the eyes of her family, Laura was behaving irrationally.
Speaker1	Canvassing neighborhoods to knock on the doors of strangers to explain to them the importance of joining an organization whose members were convinced that Armageddon was imminent and that Satan had been loosed upon the earth in October of 1914, running amok throughout the world ever since?
Speaker1	It made no sense.
Speaker1	This was not the life her parents had wanted for her.