Speaker1	That I had traded them in because I wanted the approval and love and attention of outsiders—that I wanted to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season, because I loved the world more.
Speaker1	Had I chosen the love of the world over the love of my family?
Speaker1	My mind rebelled at the thought, at the crippling guilt.
Speaker1	I would never have willingly made such an exchange.
Speaker1	This had never been a choice between strangers and family, between the world’s love and its hatred.
Speaker1	It wasn’t the desire for an easy life that led me to leave.
Speaker1	Losing them was the price of honesty.
Speaker1	A shredded heart for a quiet conscience.
Speaker1	There was silence on the other end of the line for a beat.
Speaker1	“What?”
Speaker1	I sat down at the kitchen table at the inn, watching Luna stalk across the hardwood floor.
Speaker1	She was one of the Floyds’ two black cats, a stray they’d taken in not long before Grace and I arrived.
Speaker1	Animals made me anxious, because we’d never had pets in our home—“We had brothers and allergies, instead,” I always joked—but Luna was beautiful, her fur thick and lustrous, her eyes a piercing yellow.
Speaker1	She suddenly turned and scampered up the stairs, spooked, and I switched my phone to the other ear.
Speaker1	“Yeah,” I said.
Speaker1	“You’ve definitely got part of the blame for my leaving.”
Speaker1	It had been a few days since Jeff and I had published our posts online, and I was catching up with another of my new friends and counselors.
Speaker1	David Abitbol was an Orthodox Jew living in Jerusalem, and the two of us were discussing a question that had been on my mind frequently in the months since it had first occurred to me to leave the church: How had this happened?
Speaker1	How had my perspective changed so much in such a short amount of time, from an obedient follower who instinctively suppressed doubts to a malcontent who just couldn’t leave well enough alone?
Speaker1	I had spent endless hours racking my brain for clues, tracking the changes in my perspective over time, and I found myself returning again and again to Twitter and to my complicated friendship with David—the source of my first conscious disagreement with one of Westboro’s doctrines.
Speaker1	I had reflexively suppressed it, but it had come rushing back the day that I first considered leaving Westboro, painting in that cold basement.
Speaker1	David and I had met on Twitter in 2009, almost immediately after I had brought Westboro’s message to the platform.
Speaker1	He ran a popular Jewish blog called “Jewlicious” and was active on social media, so the Jewish Telegraphic Agency had listed him second in their ranking of the “100 Most Influential Jewish Twitterers.” He had become one of my first targets.
Speaker1	Our initial exchanges were plagued by unbridled antagonism—I told David that Jewish customs were “dead, rote rituals,” while he maintained that my grandfather was a closet case—but it didn’t take long for him to tone it down, and for me to follow his lead.
Speaker1	DAVID (@Jewlicious): Ultimate frisbee in the park today against Christian team.
Speaker1	Told an Israeli, “Dude, it’s okay to hit them, because they HAVE to turn the other cheek…”
Speaker1	MEGAN (@meganphelps): You give them too much credit!
Speaker1	They don’t follow any other teachings of Jesus; what makes you think they’d follow that one?
Speaker1	=)
Speaker1	DAVID: Aw c’mon, Megan!
Speaker1	These were nice Christians!
Speaker1	Just because they don’t go picketing all over the place with signs that say “God Hates Fags…”
Speaker1	MEGAN: I’m a tad skeptical of their niceness; after all, what’s nice about encouraging people on their way to Hell?
Speaker1	Plus, I’m a little suspicious of anyone who plays ultimate frisbee.
Speaker1	=D
Speaker1	DAVID: You know, for an evil something something, you sure do crack me up …
Speaker1	When David started asking me questions about our picket signs, it gave me a kind of permission to ask him questions about Jewish theology.
Speaker1	In those days, the only thing I knew about Jews for sure was that they had killed Jesus and were thus cursed by God.… Jews: Who both killed the Lord Jesus, and their own prophets, and have persecuted us; and they please not God, and are contrary to all men.
Speaker1	But I didn’t know what Jews actually believed.
Speaker1	I wanted to understand so that I would be better prepared to argue against those beliefs, to show them from the Bible that Jewish ideas were wrong.
Speaker1	I tried to read books to help me—including The Complete Idiot’s Guide to Understanding Judaism—but I found greater clarity in speaking with a flesh-and-blood person.
Speaker1	Thanks to Twitter, the distance between Kansas and Israel was no obstacle.
Speaker1	At first, I had used passages from the New Testament to argue against David’s doctrinal positions.
Speaker1	When he said he didn’t believe in the divinity of New Testament books, I started limiting my references to the Old Testament.
Speaker1	“That’s not actually what those verses say,” he would tell me.
Speaker1	“Your translation is off.
Speaker1	You would know that if you spoke Hebrew!” In response, I bought all three levels of coursework from Rosetta Stone and signed up for webinars on biblical Hebrew so that I could learn the language.
Speaker1	David started sending me tips, teaching me new words, and saying laila tov—good night—when he signed off.
Speaker1	The dynamic between us was strange—never charged in the way that my friendship with Chad would be later, but still conflicting.
Speaker1	David was an enemy of Christ.
Speaker1	There was no confusion about the fact that we were at odds with each other, and I was certain that his understanding of the Bible was wrong—but as with C.G.
Speaker1	and so many others on Twitter, I found myself liking him anyway.
Speaker1	My conversations with David had continued for more than a year, during which time I twice protested events at which he was speaking—first at the Jewlicious Festival in California, and then at a conference in Louisiana.
Speaker1	David came out to talk with me both times, and though I continued to warn him that he was on the path to Hell, our banter had an ease to it that was unusual on the picket line.
Speaker1	In New Orleans, we even exchanged gifts.
Speaker1	He brought me a Middle Eastern dessert from the market near his home in Jerusalem, and I brought him some of my favorite peppermint chocolate.
Speaker1	He flipped the bar over and started teaching me about the kosher symbols on the packaging, while I listened earnestly and held a GOD HATES JEWS sign.
Speaker1	The temporary end of my communication with David came shortly after the picket in New Orleans, following a debate about Westboro’s DEATH PENALTY FOR FAGS sign.
Speaker1	He had pointed out that our sign contradicted Jesus’s own instruction about the death penalty—He that is without sin among you, let him first cast a stone at her—but he had also connected it to an issue that was far more personal.
Speaker1	“Didn’t your mom have your oldest brother out of wedlock?” David had asked me.
Speaker1	“That’s another sin that deserves the death penalty, isn’t it?” Until that moment, I had never thought through that fact that if my mother had been killed for her sin, she wouldn’t have had the opportunity to repent and be forgiven.
Speaker1	That without mercy, my beloved family would not exist.
Speaker1	Pacing around the inn’s dining room table, I finished explaining to David why I had suddenly stopped speaking to him two years earlier.
Speaker1	“I was terrified.
Speaker1	The points you made about the DEATH PENALTY FOR FAGS sign—that was the first time I consciously rejected one of the church’s doctrines.
Speaker1	It was the first time I believed that I could be right about something, and that the rest of the church could be wrong.
Speaker1	It gave me some little bit of confidence in my own thoughts, and helped me not to just blindly trust the elders.
Speaker1	It might seem like such a small point, but it was huge for me—a loose thread of contradiction in our tightly woven arguments.
Speaker1	I doubt I would have ever had the confidence to challenge other Westboro doctrines without that.”
Speaker1	I suddenly remembered that even my cousin Jael had realized the significant role that David had played in my departure from Westboro.
Speaker1	I read him the text message she had sent me the day after I left, specifically alluding to both David (“Jewlicious”) and C.G.
Speaker1	(“FKA”).
Speaker1	I think over some years you turned aside to try to persuade Satan through clever argument on Twitter, etc.
Speaker1	Speaking to Jewlicious, FKA, & others—you let Satan nibble on your ear and flatter your vanity—during long and continual conversations.
Speaker1	Whether that was with one or many Satan-inspired minions, it has caused you to dig for doctrinal fallacy—when you know better.
Speaker1	I had rejected my cousin’s accusations the instant I read them.
Speaker1	Being influenced by outsiders was a moral failing, and I couldn’t bring myself to acknowledge that I had allowed it to happen—and on Twitter, no less.
Speaker1	But as I considered Jael’s assertions, I stopped seeing my change of mind as a sign of weakness or vulnerability.
Speaker1	At the root of my shame was the assumption that I had nothing to learn from people like David and C.G.—a premise that had so clearly proved false.
Speaker1	Bit by bit, my shame was being replaced by profound gratitude to Twitter for its commitment to being “the free speech wing of the free speech party.” Instead of booting me from the platform for “hate speech,” as many had demanded, it had put me in conversation with people and ideas that effectively challenged beliefs that had been hammered into me since I was a child—and that conversation had been far more illuminating than decades’ worth of rage, isolation, and efforts to shame and silence.
Speaker1	It struck me as ironic that this very idea had been repeatedly referenced by church members when they spoke of the First Amendment, a quote from 1920s-era Supreme Court Justice Louis Brandeis: “If there be time to expose through discussion the falsehood and fallacies, to avert the evil by the processes of education, the remedy to be applied is more speech, not enforced silence.”
Speaker1	“Listen,” David said, after listening to all this, “you have to come to Jewlicious next month.
Speaker1	You should meet some of the people you protested here three years ago.
Speaker1	You can come and see what Judaism is really about.”
Speaker1	I chose my words carefully.
Speaker1	“Uh, I don’t … think that’s a good idea.” In fact, it specifically went against the plan that Grace and I had concocted, to wit, disappear into the ether forever.
Speaker1	“I’m sure it’s a good idea,” David countered.
Speaker1	“And listen, I know you’re afraid to talk about this stuff.
Speaker1	I know the wounds are still fresh and that we were ‘the enemy’ and all of that … but I think this will help you, and I know it will help others.
Speaker1	It could bring a lot of healing to a lot of people.
Speaker1	If you can bring yourself to do it, you absolutely should.”
Speaker1	I told him I didn’t think I could do it.
Speaker1	“If it would make you feel better, we’ll do it on Saturday.
Speaker1	It’ll be Shabbat, so there won’t be any recording—no photos or videos.
Speaker1	Just a conversation.
Speaker1	Just you and us.”
Speaker1	Everything inside me screamed no.
Speaker1	Enemy territory.
Speaker1	Betraying my family.
Speaker1	Making myself vulnerable to people I had hurt, and who had hurt me.
Speaker1	Who had every reason to hate me.
Speaker1	How could I possibly?
Speaker1	I closed my eyes and the line went silent again.
Speaker1	“Megan?” David asked.
Speaker1	“Let me talk to Grace.”
Speaker1	Three weeks later, my sister and I found ourselves in Los Angeles at the Museum of Tolerance, a modern, multilevel complex whose purpose was to encourage visitors to challenge their prejudices and assumptions.
Speaker1	I couldn’t help feeling a bit wounded by David’s suggestion that we visit—wasn’t I already doing so much to challenge my prejudices?—but I recognized in my resistance more of Westboro’s teachings: our derision of the whole concept of “tolerance.” Ideas that contradicted our own were inherently morally bankrupt.
Speaker1	Why, in the name of God, should we tolerate them?
Speaker1	Standing just outside the entrance to the first exhibit with David and Grace, I listened as the docent expounded on the museum and its history.
Speaker1	She was a stately woman, midsixties, I guessed, with silver hair cropped short.
Speaker1	The purpose of this museum wasn’t just to tell the stories of human rights atrocities, she explained, but to remind us to act when we saw things going awry.
Speaker1	To encourage us to be more than passive bystanders.
Speaker1	I had a sinking feeling listening to her descriptions of the exhibits.
Speaker1	There was going to be something about Westboro in here.
Speaker1	Sure enough, immediately after passing through the entrance, I spotted a photo on the wall.
Speaker1	“Hey, look,” I said to David.
Speaker1	“There’s Bekah and Gran.” It was a photo of my sister and grandmother protesting during the trial of one of Matthew Shepard’s killers.
Speaker1	Bekah had always been tiny as a girl, and in the photo she looked much younger than her twelve years.
Speaker1	David laughed and mocked me.
Speaker1	“‘There’s Gran!’ Well, this is why we’re here…” The three of us spoke for a few minutes about the impact that Westboro had had on the world, the number of people who had been jarred by our message.
Speaker1	Their message, I reminded myself.
Speaker1	I had to stop saying we and our and us.
Speaker1	As the three of us spoke, another docent led a group of young people in matching hunter-green sweat suits over to the photo of Bekah and Gran, a security guard trailing behind them.
Speaker1	The guide told the story of Matthew Shepard, a gay college student who was brutally murdered by two young men he met at a small-town bar, and the protests and counterprotests at his funeral.
Speaker1	We listened from a few paces back, and then David said quietly, “That’s their grandmother.”
Speaker1	I felt panicky.
Speaker1	“Excuse me?” the woman said.
Speaker1	“They grew up in that church that protests gays.
Speaker1	They left a few months ago.”
Speaker1	Fifteen confused faces stared over at Grace and me.
Speaker1	“You hated gay people?” one girl asked.
Speaker1	“I didn’t hate them…” I trailed off.
Speaker1	“I thought that God hated them.
Speaker1	I thought that the Bible said so.
Speaker1	I thought it was my duty to God to tell people that.”
Speaker1	The questions came one after another—about Westboro’s doctrines and beliefs, about what it had been like growing up there, about our family, and then finally about why we had left.
Speaker1	What had made us change.
Speaker1	I pointed at David.
Speaker1	“He helped.”
Speaker1	David held up his hands as if in self-defense.
Speaker1	“I was just trying to get her to see how misguided her ideas were—how hurtful she was being to other people.”
Speaker1	When the kids finally fell silent, the docent stood wide-eyed for a moment, and then thanked us for sharing our experiences.
Speaker1	“I’m sure it must have been so painful to leave your family, but this is an example for us, too.
Speaker1	We all need to stand up.
Speaker1	Our families might not be like yours, but when we see people being hateful or bullying others, we need to speak up.”
Speaker1	Back in the lobby at the end of our tour, David and Grace and I stood reflecting as groups of young students milled about.
Speaker1	“See?” he said.
Speaker1	“That wasn’t so bad, was it?”
Speaker1	“It made me anxious,” I said.
Speaker1	“And ashamed.
Speaker1	It’s so hard to frame the words to admit that what I so passionately believed for so long was wrong and destructive in many ways.
Speaker1	And I can’t help but feel like I’m betraying my family every time I open my mouth about any of it … But it could have been a lot worse.
Speaker1	They were very kind.”
Speaker1	I had a brief moment of hope, thinking that maybe the Jewlicious Festival that weekend might be a similar experience—but then I flashed back to the furor that had taken place three years earlier.
Speaker1	Each one of us picketers had been separated and surrounded by angry mobs.
Speaker1	Counterprotesters had dressed up as Jesus and the Easter bunny, screaming and chanting and hitting us with their signs while Long Beach police officers looked on and laughed.
Speaker1	Two old women sporting sunglasses and sneers had found their way through the boisterous crowd and planted themselves directly behind me, each whispering lurid descriptions of sex into my ears—not as Gramps had done from the pulpit, referencing gays, but with me at the center of their sick fantasies.
Speaker1	I was repulsed, wanted to bolt, but I couldn’t move because of the throng.
Speaker1	I strained to lift my signs up above the melee and sang at the top of my lungs just to keep the words of the old women out of my ears.
Speaker1	The festival, I feared, would be a different experience entirely.
Speaker1	The ninth annual Jewlicious Festival was to take place in Long Beach, California, aboard the RMS Queen Mary, an ocean liner from the 1930s now retired and permanently docked in Queensway Bay.
Speaker1	It was billed as a gathering of fifteen hundred Jewish students and young adults, who would come together for a three-day celebration of Jewish culture.
Speaker1	I spent the first two days roaming from one conversation to the next with an endless stream of questions about Jewish history, food, music, and theology, but soon ran headlong into the original catalyst for the trip.
Speaker1	After lunch on Saturday, David led Grace and me into a grand banquet room for our public discussion.
Speaker1	It had been relatively easy to endure the rejection of outsiders while I was at Westboro, surrounded by people who took the heat right alongside me—and who likewise believed that we were speaking God’s words, not our own.
Speaker1	For I have not spoken of myself; but the Father which sent me, he gave me a commandment, what I should say, and what I should speak.
Speaker1	But this—standing on my own two feet, accountable for my own thoughts and ideas, which were still in constant flux—this was panic-inducing.
Speaker1	David took in my blank stare and shallow breath.
Speaker1	“I’ll be right there with you,” he reassured me.
Speaker1	“It’ll be okay.”
Speaker1	We took our seats at a cloth-covered table at the front of the room, which had been filled to capacity with rows of chairs lined up like a firing squad.
Speaker1	Once those were taken, more people filled in the space at the edges of the room, crowding at the back before the doors were finally closed.
Speaker1	The group was about 150 strong, crammed in close, waiting.
Speaker1	“Well!” David called out.
Speaker1	“Welcome!
Speaker1	Can you all hear me okay?” No amplification equipment on Shabbat, either.
Speaker1	There were murmurs from the back.
Speaker1	All good.
Speaker1	The room was impeccably silent as David directed the conversation.
Speaker1	He returned to the earliest days of our relationship as frenemies on Twitter, offered probing questions about Westboro and its doctrines—especially as they related to Jewish people—and, finally, asked me to explain why we had left.
Speaker1	I stared assiduously down at the white tablecloth as I spoke, at the beads of condensation dripping down the sides of my glass of ice water, at David’s face as he tried to gently coax the conversation forward.