Speaker1	“She has a litany of … She thinks that the … Well, I don’t want to speak for her.” Even now, after more than eighteen months of mistreatment, on the verge of losing two of her three daughters, her “right hand,” she was too afraid of the elders even to relay my grievances about what they’d been up to.
Speaker1	“I’ve talked to Mom about this before…” I wept.
Speaker1	I said a few words about the elders.
Speaker1	About the way my mother had been treated, up until that very day.
Speaker1	“Well, this is not the way to treat your mom,” Gramps said gently.
Speaker1	It was quiet for a moment.
Speaker1	I couldn’t speak.
Speaker1	He looked over at my mother.
Speaker1	“Well.
Speaker1	I thought we had a jewel this time, Shirl.” How quickly his voice had turned.
Speaker1	Cutting.
Speaker1	Disgusted.
Speaker1	“Looks like we got it all wrong.”
Speaker1	Three elders walked in a moment later, including Sam and Steve.
Speaker1	I stood up.
Speaker1	“I don’t … I can’t…” I was in no state to talk, and I would not be bullied.
Speaker1	Not now.
Speaker1	A conversation that was sure to go nowhere.
Speaker1	A singular urge to run.
Speaker1	I turned—
Speaker1	“Megan!” My mom lowered her voice to an incredulous whisper, “Are you saying that your pride is more important than your soul?”
Speaker1	“No!” I whispered back.
Speaker1	Of course not.
Speaker1	I panicked.
Speaker1	“I need to go—”
Speaker1	I ran out of the bedroom, down the stairs, out the kitchen door, and smashed into Jael on her way in.
Speaker1	Jonah was right outside.
Speaker1	It was so cold.
Speaker1	I hugged him and told him I loved him so much, forever.
Speaker1	That I was sorry.
Speaker1	To please keep my phone number and to call me if he ever wanted to.
Speaker1	He hugged me back, but he was only fifteen.
Speaker1	He looked confused, unsure of what he was supposed to do.
Speaker1	I sprinted the rest of the way home, back up to my bedroom.
Speaker1	Margie appeared a few minutes later, crying as hard as I was.
Speaker1	“Please don’t do this,” she pleaded.
Speaker1	“Please don’t go.
Speaker1	You’ve seen and said too much.
Speaker1	You know this is right.
Speaker1	Please don’t go.
Speaker1	I’ve never asked anyone not to go.”
Speaker1	We held each other and wept.
Speaker1	“I’m sorry, Margie.
Speaker1	I love you so much.”
Speaker1	She let go after a long moment.
Speaker1	She patted my back and walked away.
Speaker1	She walked away.
Speaker1	Jael came in a short while later, acting aloof and unmoved.
Speaker1	She sat down on my bed, staring at her phone, typing away.
Speaker1	She didn’t look at me.
Speaker1	She wanted to know why we were leaving.
Speaker1	Her coldness in the face of my chaos was painful, but it made it a little easier to speak.
Speaker1	I kept packing and answered as best I could through tears and grief.
Speaker1	I spoke of the elders and their abuse of authority.
Speaker1	I spoke of the mistreatment of church members.
Speaker1	I spoke of doctrinal error, of unscriptural temperaments and picket signs.
Speaker1	I told her I didn’t think God was with Westboro anymore.
Speaker1	She said little and stayed composed, but her voice broke when she thanked me for all the work I’d done on her wedding.
Speaker1	How much time and energy I had spent to make it special.
Speaker1	“I only ever wanted to be good to you,” I tried to say.
Speaker1	I had to say it twice before she could understand.
Speaker1	“But friendship is a two-way street,” she said, “and if I haven’t been doing it on my side, I’m sorry.” She was quiet for a long time, the only sound the clacking of the hangers as I pulled shirts off them one by one.
Speaker1	Bekah and I had shared a wardrobe for years—“the community closet”—and I had to decide what to take and what to leave.
Speaker1	“Have you been praying for the Lord to help you?” Jael asked.
Speaker1	I nodded.
Speaker1	“And my mom and I would together.”
Speaker1	My dad walked in to discuss my assertion that I didn’t have a voice anymore.
Speaker1	“Are you happy?” he asked Jael.
Speaker1	She nodded.
Speaker1	“Do you think you have a voice?”
Speaker1	“Through my husband,” Jael said.
Speaker1	Simpering.
Speaker1	“And is that acceptable or unacceptable to you?”
Speaker1	“That’s the way it should be,” Jael answered.
Speaker1	“She has a voice through you.
Speaker1	She has to submit to her father.
Speaker1	That’s her lot.”
Speaker1	And that was how the elders had managed to pull this off, I thought.
Speaker1	The conflation of parental and ecclesiastical authority was only possible in a church like ours, where nearly everyone was related.
Speaker1	By rendering us “children” so long as we were unmarried, they thwarted all possible challenges to their control.
Speaker1	There was no need to listen to what anyone else thought, because as our parents, they would tell us what to think.
Speaker1	I shook my head involuntarily.
Speaker1	My father had never been like this.
Speaker1	I hated what this church had done to him.
Speaker1	I hated what it had done to my mother.
Speaker1	I hated what it was doing to our family, and to everyone we had taken aim at outside.
Speaker1	This place was toxic.
Speaker1	I ran downstairs to sort out my desk and found Bekah.
Speaker1	She held out her arms and I fell into them, both of us openly weeping.
Speaker1	She was getting ready to head out the door.
Speaker1	“I have to go drive with Jayme,” she said, “and you gotta do what you’re doing, so I guess we’re parting ways.”
Speaker1	“I love you so much, Bekah.” Why didn’t better words exist?
Speaker1	Your voice will follow me like a shadow for the rest of my days and I’ll never be whole without you and The nights I dream of you will be my happiest.
Speaker1	I couldn’t let her go.
Speaker1	“I don’t know how you can say that and be doing this,” she cried, “but Mom says you’re always welcome back here.”
Speaker1	“I tried to talk to you about all this…” I wept into her shoulder.
Speaker1	Someone was playing a hymn on the piano.
Speaker1	“I hoped you just needed to get the right words from the right person,” Bekah said.
Speaker1	We clung to each other until it didn’t make sense, and then she tapped me three times—the way we always signaled the end of a massage—and she turned to go.
Speaker1	Noah texted me: “Pls turn around.”
Speaker1	I looked up, and he stood there looking nervous.
Speaker1	Afraid to speak to me.
Speaker1	I turned, and I saw Zach’s computer from across the room.
Speaker1	Noah often used it to play Minecraft, but now he’d set it up with a message for me.
Speaker1	“MEGAN, LOOK” it read, with an arrow pointing to the second monitor.
Speaker1	I moved closer.
Speaker1	He had pulled up the Kansas City Star article from a year earlier.
Speaker1	I’m all in.
Speaker1	I wanted to tell him how often I had wished to go back to that place.
Speaker1	How much I’d wanted to un-ask the questions, to un-see the contradictions.
Speaker1	Instead, I hugged him.
Speaker1	He was only thirteen.
Speaker1	Maybe one day he would look back at this moment and understand.
Speaker1	The way I had with Josh.
Speaker1	I texted him back.
Speaker1	“I love you, my brother.
Speaker1	Forever and ever.
Speaker1	I’m so sorry.”
Speaker1	One by one, I said goodbye to my siblings as I came upon them.
Speaker1	Three hours after my father walked into my bedroom, he was helping us load the minivan with our things.
Speaker1	We’d have to come back the next day with a U-Haul.
Speaker1	We couldn’t stay in the house that night—our lifelong home was not our house anymore—so he would leave us at the motel next to our old middle school.
Speaker1	He checked us in, helped us unload the minivan, hugged us, and left.
Speaker1	Room 108 was cold and sterile, entirely devoid of life, warmth, or happiness.
Speaker1	It was everything I was afraid the world would be, and I couldn’t bear to stay there, not then.
Speaker1	I sent a message to Newbery asking if Grace and I could stay with his family that night, and then Grace and I sat on the bed, waiting.
Speaker1	A few minutes passed, and then my cousin Libby arrived with her husband.
Speaker1	I hadn’t spoken to her in the years since she’d left the church—she’d been cast as “Libidinous Libby” upon her exit, a selfish, self-important whore—but along with so many other of Westboro’s judgments, I’d started to question their thoughts on her, too.
Speaker1	I’d worked up the courage to reach out to her a few weeks earlier—a phone call to her office, because I was afraid she’d turn on me and publish my message if I emailed her.
Speaker1	I’d told Libby that Grace and I were probably leaving, and she said, “I want you to come live with me,” and we spoke like friends who hadn’t just missed the last three and a half years of each other’s lives.
Speaker1	In the howling, icy wind and the stark fluorescent light of the motel parking lot, the four of us loaded suitcases into the back of Libby’s car.
Speaker1	They’d take it all back to their home in Lawrence, thirty miles away.
Speaker1	My sister and I would follow in the morning.
Speaker1	We hugged them goodbye, and they headed home with our things.
Speaker1	As Grace and I drove to Newbery’s house in silence, I thought of a conversation I’d had with Bekah back in August.
Speaker1	A letter had gone viral—a father disowning his son for coming out as gay—and she had called me into her office at the law firm.
Speaker1	“I can’t believe it!” she’d exclaimed.
Speaker1	“This guy actually says it right!” She started to read aloud, detailing the father’s refusal to have any further communication with his son.
Speaker1	Their happy times together were a thing of the past, and his son was no longer welcome in his home.
Speaker1	“If you choose not to attend my funeral,” he wrote, “my friends and family will understand.”
Speaker1	I’d felt my heart sink as Bekah read, but she was too excited to notice that I’d only managed a dull “Wow…” in response.
Speaker1	I knew this letter was exactly the posture my family would take if we left.
Speaker1	Grace and I had wept that night, realizing that it was gay people—I’d stopped using the “f” word by then—who would best understand what we were going through.
Speaker1	The community we had antagonized more than any other.
Speaker1	I hated that it had had to come to this for me to understand what the church had been doing to vulnerable people for so long.
Speaker1	For with what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged: and with what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again.
Speaker1	I couldn’t escape the sense of certainty pulsing through me as I pulled into Newbery’s driveway.
Speaker1	No matter what I had intended, I deserved every bit of this.
Speaker1	Newbery opened the door.
Speaker1	His two sons and his wife were already asleep.
Speaker1	He led us down to their basement, a pile of linens in hand, and Grace and I each picked a couch and tucked ourselves in.
Speaker1	This place was foreign, but unlike the motel, it was bright and cozy.
Speaker1	And most important: we had friends here.
Speaker1	I was ready to cry myself to sleep, assuming Newbery would leave us to our misery and head off to bed.
Speaker1	Instead he sat down in a recliner and talked with us for a couple of hours.
Speaker1	I hadn’t known how badly I needed to talk to someone until he started asking his gentle, unassuming questions.
Speaker1	How urgently I needed to mourn my family aloud, free of the need to stifle and camouflage every word.
Speaker1	Why had they made it so hard to tell the truth?
Speaker1	Just before 10 A.M. the following morning, I parked an enormous U-Haul at the end of our front sidewalk.
Speaker1	Grace and I walked up to the front door like we had a thousand times before.
Speaker1	I rang the doorbell.
Speaker1	“Why did you ring the doorbell?
Speaker1	!” Grace was incredulous.
Speaker1	“Because…” I had never thought to do otherwise.
Speaker1	We were outsiders now.
Speaker1	I had internalized my new status overnight.
Speaker1	My parents reinforced that status from the moment they opened the door.
Speaker1	They stayed with us wherever we roamed in the house, apparently afraid to leave us alone.
Speaker1	As if they couldn’t trust us.
Speaker1	It hurt my heart, but not like the jacket I found hanging on my bedroom door.
Speaker1	Tucked into the hood was a sheet of paper torn from a notebook, with Bekah’s handwriting: “This is yours, Meg.” She had received the jacket as a gift from Jael several years earlier, but she’d shared it with me because she knew I loved it, too.
Speaker1	We wore it so much that we’d put a hole in the left sleeve.
Speaker1	The first moment I was alone, I slipped across the hall into Bekah’s bedroom, pressed my forehead to the floor, and wept so hard no sound came out.
Speaker1	At the thought of her lying in bed thinking about this the night before.
Speaker1	At the thought that she wanted to give me this piece of her—of us—to take with me.
Speaker1	At the fact that she couldn’t say anything more than This is yours, Meg without running afoul of our family’s expectations of her.
Speaker1	I tore a page out of the same notebook, but my thoughts were a circle of I love you I’m sorry I love you I’m sorry I love you I’m sorry, and expressions of those thoughts were the only things to come out of my pencil.
Speaker1	Dearest sister-mine, Flor, Babi Lynne, Bobber Sue,
Speaker1	I’m so sorry.
Speaker1	I wish I could have been better.
Speaker1	I love you more than words could ever say.
Speaker1	I will love you and miss you forever, no matter what.
Speaker1	I’m so sorry for everything, and for every offense I caused you.
Speaker1	I’m so sorry.
Speaker1	I love you.
Speaker1	Swirl, MegHeart, Megabee, Megabus
Speaker1	I left the tears that fell on the page and on her desk.
Speaker1	They would be dry by the time she saw my note, but I hoped she would feel them anyway, and that they would say more than my words.
Speaker1	As my parents, Grace, and I moved back and forth between the front door and the bedrooms, our timing became mismatched, and I found myself alone for another moment.
Speaker1	I looked around, and then took off down the basement steps, rounded the corners, and ran into the darkened party room.
Speaker1	Filled with a dozen long tables each encircled by chairs, this was a space we used to celebrate birthdays in the winter, and for meetings and Bible studies year-round.
Speaker1	I flipped on the lights and pulled my phone from the back pocket of my jeans.
Speaker1	Photos of my grandparents and their children hung all along the room’s two longest walls.
Speaker1	I had wanted to take photos of them all before I left, but there hadn’t been time.
Speaker1	There was never enough time.
Speaker1	I pressed record and made my way around the room as fast as I could, afraid I’d be caught and told to stop.
Speaker1	Still filming, I switched off the lights and continued to move quickly, back through the laundry room with the drain that had terrified me as a kid, back through the rooms that Josh had lived in just before he left, back up the fourteen steps, and into the kitchen.
Speaker1	Weeping now, I moved through the downstairs, carefully avoiding my parents and sister.
Speaker1	This could not be happening.
Speaker1	Making my way around the upstairs next, I stopped at the photos of an exuberant baby Gabe.
Speaker1	They were taken before his headful of blond curls had come in, back when he was bald and so fat he had three chins.
Speaker1	I wondered if we would ever be friends before he grew bald again.
Speaker1	I choked on the thought.
Speaker1	I made it back to my room.
Speaker1	Grace and our dad were outside loading a piece of furniture into the U-Haul.
Speaker1	Hesitant, my mom pushed open the door to my rapidly emptying bedroom.
Speaker1	I looked up and stopped moving.
Speaker1	She stayed just inside the door.
Speaker1	She looked like she wanted to come closer, but was afraid.
Speaker1	Her tone was cautious.
Speaker1	“What will you do, Meg?
Speaker1	You’ve loved these doctrines.
Speaker1	You were a little girl, walking around the park—”
Speaker1	Her voice broke and her face twisted in despair.
Speaker1	Gage Park.
Speaker1	Our earliest pickets, back when I was five.
Speaker1	She finished the sentence in tears.
Speaker1	“—and you were so happy.”
Speaker1	She turned to go, and all I could do was weep.
Speaker1	I had no idea what I was going to do.
Speaker1	I just knew that I would never be free of the pain of causing her pain.
Speaker1	Of all the dreadful things I had ever done or ever would do, nothing—nothing—would be worse than this.
Speaker1	The van was filled too quickly.
Speaker1	We asked for our Bibles and headscarves and hymn books, and our father ran down to the church to get them.
Speaker1	We met him and our mother outside by the garage.
Speaker1	No hymn books, he said.
Speaker1	Those belonged to the church.
Speaker1	I thought of the blue hymnal that I’d written all over when Grace was born: “Megan Phelps-Roper + Grace Phelps-Roper” with a heart drawn around them.
Speaker1	If they didn’t cover it up, it would be an object of scorn and pity for its new owner.
Speaker1	Those two foolish girls.
Speaker1	It was time for final hugs.
Speaker1	Dad first.
Speaker1	“Well, we’re not gonna be doing this for a while.” He didn’t mean it unkindly.
Speaker1	And then Mom.
Speaker1	“Goodbye, doll.”
Speaker1	I was shaking.
Speaker1	I don’t remember if I said anything.
Speaker1	I just held them tight for as long as they let me.
Speaker1	Grace and I turned to cross the yard to the van.
Speaker1	“Girls?” Mom called out.
Speaker1	We turned.
Speaker1	“You can always come back.”
Speaker1	Her hope broke me more than her tears.
