Speaker1	They were using his last days to punish and cajole him into “repentance.” And after all of that, they would surely prevent us from seeing him—the only people willing to sit by his side, to offer a comforting presence to a dying man, largely abandoned by those he had loved and trusted—all so that they could maintain control of a narrative in their minds and in the media.
Speaker1	I could already hear them talking dismissively among themselves: We don’t owe these people anything.
Speaker1	They didn’t answer to anyone, least of all us.
Speaker1	Pulsing through me was an unmitigated disgust for my family, frightening in its intensity.
Speaker1	Had Gramps still been a member of the church, there would have been another member keeping vigil at his bedside at all hours of the day and night—talking with him, reading with him, singing with him.
Speaker1	I gripped the steering wheel so hard my nails bit into my palms, weeping bitterly at the thought of the church sentencing him to live out his final days alone, confused, and afraid.
Speaker1	Not even I would have envisioned them sinking to such depths of cruelty.
Speaker1	I found Zach the following afternoon and spent an hour reading text messages on his phone, following the progression of my grandfather’s illness—and his status within the church—from day to day.
Speaker1	In the beginning, my family’s words were full of tenderness and praise.
Speaker1	“We should all be very thankful,” my uncle wrote, “that we have a faithful pastor who genuinely cares for our souls and has—at great personal lifelong sacrifice—fed us with the manna of God’s word without dilution.” I read on through the weeks and months as the tenderness disappeared, replaced by a cold and clinical distance.
Speaker1	After my grandfather was stripped of his role as pastor and of church membership, most other members ended all contact with him, as required.
Speaker1	And when his health deteriorated further, one of his daughters was designated to handle his care and send daily updates to a select group of trusted church members—my brother Zach among them—while the rest were kept largely in the dark.
Speaker1	They couldn’t desert him entirely to Topeka’s medical establishment, lest word of his illness and abandonment find its way into the newspapers that had been closely watching for signs of his demise for at least a dozen years.
Speaker1	My aunt’s messages stopped the day that Zach left, of course, but they were enough.
Speaker1	More than a month of daily reports while Gramps had been in professional care.
Speaker1	In addition to his many physical problems, the messages spoke of “cognitive decline,” “dementia,” and failing organs that sometimes led to a state of “delirium.” When his body began to improve, a doctor warned that my grandfather would likely not show improvement in his cognition unless he was motivated to, suggesting that the presence of more familiar and comforting voices would help—but Westboro continued its campaign of isolation.
Speaker1	My grandfather’s mental condition would be on his death certificate two weeks later, as well, not the cause of death—respiratory failure, pneumonia—but a “significant condition contributing to death”: encephalopathy.
Speaker1	Disease of the brain, as Google explained, manifested by an altered mental state.
Speaker1	Zach described some of the symptoms that ultimately contributed to my grandfather’s exclusion from the church, and it was abundantly clear that some of his actions were so strange and out of character that he could not possibly have been in his right mind in those moments.
Speaker1	With other symptoms, though, it seemed that his actions weren’t ravings but genuine changes in his perspective, particularly as it related to the church.
Speaker1	According to Zach, my grandfather had come to see his congregation as cruel and unmerciful.
Speaker1	I remembered my despair at coming to the same conclusion when I was painting in that dank basement: as if we were finally doing to ourselves what we had been doing to others.
Speaker1	I believed Zach’s assessment, because in the months before I left Westboro, my grandfather had been one of the few men in the church who was encouraging more kindness, gentleness, and compassion.
Speaker1	Only by pride cometh contention, the verse said, and after the new elders took over, Gramps had quoted and paraphrased it often.
Speaker1	“If there is no pride, there will be no contention,” he intoned.
Speaker1	“Where there is great humility, there will be no contention.” As if he were trying to reform the beast he had created.
Speaker1	But it was too late.
Speaker1	He had spent decades inculcating us with an ideology that valued fear and control over mercy and grace.
Speaker1	He was the one who had taught church members to have unshakable faith in their own perspective, to believe their judgment was as God’s judgment, with de facto status as infallible.
Speaker1	Not even my grandfather could stop the course he had set in motion.
Speaker1	Though we, or an angel from heaven, preach any other gospel unto you than that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed.
Speaker1	Gramps was the heretic now.
Speaker1	His illness was proof not of his age, but that God had condemned him.
Speaker1	To church members, dementia was the result of my grandfather’s strange behavior, rather than its cause.
Speaker1	If he were a man of God, the argument went, then he wouldn’t have this illness.
Speaker1	I thought of the blind man of John 9.
Speaker1	And his disciples asked him, saying, Master, who did sin, this man, or his parents, that he was born blind?
Speaker1	Jesus answered, Neither hath this man sinned, nor his parents: but that the works of God should be made manifest in him.
Speaker1	The story—along with the entire book of Job—showed clearly that not all illness was punishment for sin.
Speaker1	Westboro knew better, though.
Speaker1	Shortly before he was removed from church membership, as Zach told me, our grandfather had stepped out the front door of the church to address the young people running the Equality House across the street.
Speaker1	A nonprofit called Planting Peace had bought the house in 2012 and painted it in the colors of the rainbow, the global symbol of the LGBT rights movement.
Speaker1	It was a perpetual monument standing in opposition to the church and its message of judgment and damnation.
Speaker1	“You’re good people,” Gramps called out to them from across the street, before he was hustled back inside by Westboro members.
Speaker1	At the church meeting where he was excommunicated, the elders gave this incident as the clearest evidence of my grandfather’s heresy—casting his lot in with the Sodomites—and judged that he was lucid when it occurred.
Speaker1	Given all the harm Gramps had sown during his life, I knew that many would find an end-of-life change of heart to be too little, too late.
Speaker1	That if they could witness his devastating end, some would rejoice in it the same way that he had done to others for so many years.
Speaker1	They would see my family’s cruel treatment of him as righteous recompense for a man who beat his wife and children into submission, who used his considerable resources to attack and antagonize the world without compunction.
Speaker1	I could already hear their arguments, and though I wanted to defend him—“But his decades of civil rights work!”—I had no real rebuttal.
Speaker1	Still, I couldn’t stop the overwhelming sense of hope that washed over me.
Speaker1	My own change of heart and mind had already made me optimistic about the same potential in others—and now with evidence that even someone like Gramps could experience this kind of change, the idea of completely writing anyone off seemed senseless.
Speaker1	After I hugged Zach and handed his phone back to him, I picked Grace up from school and pointed my car to the Midland Hospice House.
Speaker1	I drove past Gage Park and the corner where we had first taken our signs to the streets, past the pond where my father had taken us to feed the ducks when we were kids, and pulled my car into the most remote section of the hospice parking lot—just in case my aunt showed up.
Speaker1	Grace and I stepped out and looked at each other across the hood of the car, assessing.
Speaker1	What was out of place?
Speaker1	Our earrings, we decided.
Speaker1	We removed them while debating whether Grace should put her hair up.
Speaker1	“It doesn’t look cut!” she insisted.
Speaker1	We didn’t want to upset him.
Speaker1	The woman who greeted us at the front door looked suspicious when I asked for Fred Phelps.
Speaker1	“And you are…?”
Speaker1	“His granddaughters,” I said firmly.
Speaker1	She looked doubtful.
Speaker1	“Let me check with his nurse.”
Speaker1	The nurse rounded the corner a moment later.
Speaker1	“You’re the one who called from California?” she asked.
Speaker1	I was.
Speaker1	The nurse gave me a sad little half smile, nodded, and led us down the hall to the door of his room.
Speaker1	“This is him.”
Speaker1	I put my hand on the doorknob and paused.
Speaker1	“Is he … lucid?” I asked.
Speaker1	“Yeah.
Speaker1	At times, he is.
Speaker1	At times, he is.”
Speaker1	I nodded and stepped carefully into my grandfather’s room.
Speaker1	The waning light of dusk drifted in through the window over his bed, brightened by the warm glow of a few lamps scattered around the room.
Speaker1	The television was on, as so often it had been in his bedroom back home, but he wasn’t paying attention to it.
Speaker1	Grace stood just outside the door, waiting to see how he would respond.
Speaker1	Would he be happy to see us?
Speaker1	Or was he of a mind to rejoin the church, viewing our visit as a hindrance to that goal?
Speaker1	Was the disdain he felt the day I left still seething?
Speaker1	My heart clenched at the thought.
Speaker1	His last words to me still reverberated often in my thoughts, that bitter, biting tone.
Speaker1	I thought we had a jewel this time.
Speaker1	The last thing I wanted was to dredge up bad memories for him.
Speaker1	If he showed any sign of being upset at our presence, we would leave immediately.
Speaker1	But there were no such signs.
Speaker1	The head of his bed was elevated, and when I approached, he looked over at me with recognition and welcome.
Speaker1	I couldn’t understand almost anything he tried to say at first—he was so weak, his mouth so dry, his voice so far from the booming proclamations he had delivered from the pulpit all those years.
Speaker1	But his eyes seemed aware, and he laughed at me when I tried to interpret his words.
Speaker1	I gave him water when he pointed to his glass, and told him that Grace had come to see him, too.
Speaker1	She came in a minute later.
Speaker1	We sat next to him on his bed, me by his side, she near his feet.
Speaker1	We realized quickly that he was in and out of lucidity.
Speaker1	In his mind, he seemed to be preaching in front of a congregation.
Speaker1	He asked me to pass out the hymnals.
Speaker1	He wanted to sing.
Speaker1	I knew the song as soon as he started quoting the lyrics: When peace like a river attendeth my way / when sorrows like sea billows roll.
Speaker1	I searched YouTube and pressed play.
Speaker1	“It Is Well With My Soul.” A friend would tell me later that it was a popular funeral hymn.
Speaker1	The three of us sang along with the music, Gramps oblivious to the tears pouring down our faces.
Speaker1	He prayed to God in thanks for the church and for His help.
Speaker1	I held his hand while he started to preach a wedding sermon.
Speaker1	A little time, and he seemed to be in a different place mentally.
Speaker1	“Brothers and sisters,” he said gravely, “I hope you believe that I’m doing my best, and that I’ll continue to do more with pleasure and privilege.
Speaker1	I’m not a threat.” He looked at me.
Speaker1	I told him that I believed him, and squeezed his hand tight.
Speaker1	I imagined him at the center of one of those godforsaken disciplinary meetings.
Speaker1	I hated their self-righteousness.
Speaker1	I hated their sociopathic lack of empathy.
Speaker1	Whatever God there might be, He was not in that place.
Speaker1	Gramps didn’t seem to understand where he was until I told him about Libby.
Speaker1	She had just given birth to her first child, a son.
Speaker1	Paxton, meaning “peace.” I showed him a photo, and he seemed to snap back to the present immediately.
Speaker1	“Was he born yesterday?” he asked.
Speaker1	“Two days ago,” I said.
Speaker1	I told him we would all come back to see him tomorrow.
Speaker1	He said, “I remember her as a sweet little baby.
Speaker1	Just a little baby.
Speaker1	And now she’s a mother.” He asked how old she was now.
Speaker1	He looked at Grace and said, “Mama.” He was asking about Gran.
Speaker1	I told him that Gran loves him very much.
Speaker1	His eyes found mine instantly and he said, “She said that?” I nodded and said yes.
Speaker1	I’d heard her say it many times.
Speaker1	“Such a beautiful woman,” he said.
Speaker1	“I can never get over how beautiful Gran is.
Speaker1	She’s in all you grandchildren and great-grandchildren.
Speaker1	So beautiful.” He looked at Grace.
Speaker1	“You look so young.” He told her she looked tired.
Speaker1	“You need to find a place to lie down.”
Speaker1	He thanked us for coming to see him.
Speaker1	He asked if we’d come back and said that he wouldn’t hold it against us if we did, joking like his old self.
Speaker1	I kissed his forehead, and he looked at me and said that we were wonderful grandchildren.
Speaker1	Just wonderful.
Speaker1	That we always were.
Speaker1	“Special,” he said.
Speaker1	“So special.” I hugged him for a long time and cried with my cheek pressed against his chest.
Speaker1	He lifted his hand and held my face while I did.
Speaker1	And when I stood up, he motioned me down as if to kiss me.
Speaker1	I put my cheek to his lips, and he kissed it several times quickly, the way he always had.
Speaker1	“Muah, muah, muah, muah, muah.” I did it back.
Speaker1	He looked at Grace and said, “Sugar, I just want you to know that I love you.” She told him she loved him, too.
Speaker1	We kissed and hugged him again, and he kissed our cheeks, and we promised to come back tomorrow to see him, all of us unaware that the church would uncover our visit the next day and instruct the hospice to keep us—and every other visitor—away from him.
Speaker1	He was drifting off to sleep as we left.
Speaker1	The sun was gone when my sister and I left the hospice, my car automatically steering its way back home.
Speaker1	Driving around the block was always the last thing we did before leaving town.
Speaker1	For over a year, we had been reaching out to our family here.
Speaker1	To share with them the experiences that opened our minds.
Speaker1	To remind them of passages we had so long ignored while we were together.
Speaker1	To convince them that there were other ways.
Speaker1	We knew the messages were unwelcome—not unlike Westboro’s decades of protests—but we sent them anyway and would for years to come.
Speaker1	We did not use the bombast of our grandfather or the florid insults of our mother, but the still, small voice I had learned from Chad, from David, from the sassy start-up employee in Chicago, and the hilarious Australian guy, people who learned the lesson that Margie had tried to teach me as a child.
Speaker1	A soft tongue breaketh the bone.
Speaker1	In the years that followed, I watched in amazement as the signs I most often argued against—PRAY FOR MORE DEAD SOLDIERS; PRAY FOR MORE DEAD KIDS; FAGS CAN’T REPENT—began to disappear from their repertoire, replaced by messages like CHRIST OUR STRENGTH and BE RECONCILED TO GOD.
Speaker1	It was all the encouragement I needed to go on.
Speaker1	Grace and I use tweets and letters and postcards to reach them, cupcake deliveries and birthday presents.
Speaker1	And just once, we used a sign.
Speaker1	For four years, it sat at the corner of 12th and Cambridge, right in the midst of our old neighborhood.
Speaker1	A brand-new bus bench I had noticed on a similar drive just a few months after we left.
Speaker1	It had been blank back then, except for a phone number to call if you wanted to buy the ad space.
Speaker1	Grace and I had spent over a month trying to figure out what to put on it.
Speaker1	What would we say to our loved ones living in the surrounding houses?
Speaker1	What was the most important thing to tell them?
Speaker1	To anyone driving past, the bench’s message looked like a nonsense saying written in chalk paint, surrounded by brightly colored drawings that belonged in the pages of a children’s book.
Speaker1	To our family, it was a reminder.
Speaker1	“Goldbugs forever,” it read in Grace’s loopy handwriting.
Speaker1	A mistaken iPhone autocorrect for “good night” that became a saying among the siblings.
Speaker1	“Goldbugs, bro.” “Goldbugs, sis.”
Speaker1	A sweet way of saying Good night.
Speaker1	I love you.
Speaker1	The drawings were for the children who couldn’t read yet.
Speaker1	The ones Grace had always drawn for them.
Speaker1	The little sailboat on its choppy waters.
Speaker1	The fat, floating bubble man stretching his arms out toward a heart.
Speaker1	The jolly baby with a lollipop, a shirt too small to cover his belly, and a bib that read simply FOOD.
Speaker1	The interconnected symbols of the sun, the flower, and the swirl.
Speaker1	Grace, Bekah, and me, back together as we should be.
Speaker1	And on the back of the bench, a line from a story my sister read to us after Bible study one evening.
Speaker1	Another Hans Christian Andersen.
Speaker1	There is always a clinging to the land of one’s birth.
Speaker1	Gramps is gone now, buried unceremoniously in an unmarked grave under the Kansas sun.
Speaker1	Yet his church remains.
Speaker1	I’m just around the corner from it, right outside my old front door.
Speaker1	Gran lives here now, with my mom and my dad and my brothers and my sister.
Speaker1	Their hearts beat just inside.
Speaker1	I can’t knock, and I don’t pray anymore, but I can wish that it all would end.
Speaker1	That the walls they built to keep me out would vanish.
Speaker1	I want to tell them that the world isn’t evil.
Speaker1	That it’s full and complicated and beautiful and good, filled with unknown truths and unbroken hopes, and that it’s waiting just for them.
Speaker1	That I’m waiting just for them.
Speaker1	I want to tell them that I love them.
Speaker1	I’ll just have to find another way.
