Speaker1	Chapter five.
Speaker1	The Lust of the Flesh
Speaker1	The only thing he ever lied to me about was his age.
Speaker1	Since we were living in the golden era of catfishing, it occurred to me that this was nothing short of a true miracle.
Speaker1	I wasn’t even sure it counted as a lie, either, since the number he gave me without context (“Age 38.”) was his age when we first met.
Speaker1	It was February 2011, and my church’s website, GodHatesFags.com, had just been taken over by the hacker collective known as Anonymous, which replaced our Gospel preaching with a mocking message.
Speaker1	The takeover happened live on a popular web show during a joint interview with the hacker and my mother—defiant even in the face of ostensible defeat—and the video spread rapidly, garnering half a million views in twelve hours and featured on YouTube’s home page.
Speaker1	We responded predictably, my aunt Margie penning a provocative press release that I immediately posted to Twitter along with our challenge to Anonymous: “Bring it, cowards.” Westboro and Anonymous are each notorious in their own right, and with the added spectacle of a mid-interview hack, the story was irresistible.
Speaker1	The drama was reported by major news outlets across the country—which is how my name and photo ended up in the RSS feed of a man living in a tiny town in eastern South Dakota.
Speaker1	The first tweet he sent me must have been crude, because my response included a warning to “get your head outta the gutter.” His message was lost to me almost instantly, though, one among a deluge.
Speaker1	With the advice and consent of my mother, I had become Westboro’s voice on Twitter eighteen months earlier, and had found great success at getting attention for our message.
Speaker1	For years, my proximity to my mother had thrust me into the logistical work that powered Westboro’s picketing engine.
Speaker1	Combined with my boundless energy and enthusiasm for our beliefs, that proximity had also given me a high-profile public voice that others of my peers lacked.
Speaker1	Reporters would come to interview my mother as our de facto spokesperson, and then turn to me with questions about the perspective of the Phelps grandchildren—the first Westboro generation to have grown up on the picket line.
Speaker1	I believed our doctrines to be the very definition of goodness and righteousness—not tedious or burdensome—and I loved them with all the fervor my mother had been modeling since I was a child.
Speaker1	For this is the love of God, that we keep his commandments: and his commandments are not grievous.
Speaker1	Though I was always afraid I wasn’t sufficiently articulate to speak for the church, I never let that stop me from stepping up to the plate—and the more I spoke, the more I learned how to speak.
Speaker1	I was ever eager to fulfill my duty both to exhort and to convince the gainsayers with sound doctrine, and that trend had continued into the social media age.
Speaker1	Thanks to our rising profile after the oral arguments, I was now receiving sometimes hundreds of tweets a day and posting dozens more of my own.
Speaker1	Although we protested at Twitter’s San Francisco headquarters, I’d come to love the platform dearly: a place for me to spread our message in a way that didn’t require the distorting lens of a journalist who just couldn’t seem to get it, no matter how much effort I spent trying to explain.
Speaker1	I discovered I was far more effective at pleading our cause directly to the people on Twitter, absent the influence of Bible-ignorant hacks who wielded professional cameras and microphones.
Speaker1	After two decades on the picket line, I was twenty-five years old and a skilled defender of Westboro and its many controversial doctrines.
Speaker1	This random guy was just an anonymous face in the crowd asking the same questions I’d answered hundreds of thousands of times before.
Speaker1	“‘God hates fags’ not ‘I hate fags,’” I clarified for him.
Speaker1	“We love them more than anyone.”
Speaker1	MEGAN AMRAM (@meganamram): cool name
Speaker1	MEGAN PHELPS-ROPER (@meganphelps): Thanks!
Speaker1	Sometimes your parents give you a cool name, sometimes you go to fiery eternal torment for hating God & teaching sin.
Speaker1	=(
Speaker1	Less than two weeks after the Anonymous attack, the Supreme Court published its opinion in Snyder v. Phelps, and the media circus surrounding the church ramped up a hundredfold.
Speaker1	God had worked in the hearts of the justices, and we had prevailed against our adversaries.
Speaker1	Had the Snyder lawsuit succeeded, we knew that the much-vaunted American right to freedom of speech would have become little more than window dressing: if one person can label another’s opinions on public issues “offensive” and then sue the speaker for millions of dollars in damages, what protection does the First Amendment offer?
Speaker1	By that logic, a member of the KKK could sue a black protester for protesting a Klan meeting while promoting the “offensive” belief that racism is a societal evil.
Speaker1	The Snyder lawsuit had to fail, because, as Chief Justice John Roberts wrote for the majority:
Speaker1	Westboro believes that America is morally flawed; many Americans might feel the same about Westboro.
Speaker1	Westboro’s funeral picketing is certainly hurtful and its contribution to public discourse may be negligible.
Speaker1	But Westboro addressed matters of public import on public property, in a peaceful manner, in full compliance with the guidance of local officials.
Speaker1	The speech was indeed planned to coincide with Matthew Snyder’s funeral, but did not itself disrupt that funeral, and Westboro’s choice to conduct its picketing at that time and place did not alter the nature of its speech.
Speaker1	Speech is powerful.
Speaker1	It can stir people to action, move them to tears of both joy and sorrow, and—as it did here—inflict great pain.
Speaker1	On the facts before us, we cannot react to that pain by punishing the speaker.
Speaker1	As a Nation we have chosen a different course—to protect even hurtful speech on public issues to ensure that we do not stifle public debate.
Speaker1	That choice requires that we shield Westboro from tort liability for its picketing in this case.
Speaker1	Emboldened by our success, we announced that we would quadruple our protests of soldiers’ funerals.
Speaker1	In the days and weeks that followed, I was more active on social media than ever before or since, so thankful to be one of God’s representatives on earth and utterly exultant that He had put a megaphone to the mouth of our tiny church.
Speaker1	I used Twitter to bait celebrities with anti-gay messages, to publicly celebrate Japan’s Fukushima nuclear disaster, and to debate the merits of the Snyder case with anyone who would listen.
Speaker1	Whether I was cooking dinner, sitting on an airplane, or standing at a protest holding two signs in one hand and my iPhone in the other, I spent every spare moment I could find answering thousands of users, whether they were curious, angry, confused, or mocking.
Speaker1	BRETT MICHAEL DYKES (@thecajunboy): Lil Wayne is making abstinence education videos now, apparently …
Speaker1	MEGAN PHELPS-ROPER (@meganphelps): With 1 in 4 U.S. girls aged 14–19 having an STD, abstinence is *clearly* the problem, @thecajunboy.
Speaker1	Pssst: #GodHatesFornication!
Speaker1	BMD: Go fuck yourself.
Speaker1	MPR: Why yes—it HAS been too long since WBC’s been to [your area]!
Speaker1	Picket ideas?
Speaker1	You know who to tweet.
Speaker1	;) #Obey
Speaker1	And in the midst of it all, him.
Speaker1	Over the weeks, I started to notice his name and photo each time they appeared among the flood of messages I was receiving, though neither gave me any hint as to who he could be.
Speaker1	His name was “FormerlyKnownAs,” his profile picture that iconic image of Robert Redford as Jay Gatsby, leaning against the yellow convertible; I studiously ignored the spike in my heart rate and the dopamine rush I experienced whenever I saw them.
Speaker1	So many of those who messaged me were enraged—understandably so, given that we were disposed to celebrating the deaths of children and blaming their parents for the tragedies that took them—and while he was certainly perplexed by our doctrines, anger had no part in his response after that first tweet.
Speaker1	Instead he lurked, his infrequent questions belying the fact that he was reading each and every word I posted.
Speaker1	His careful attention was intimidating and intoxicating, and all the more so as a figure of him started to form in my mind: exceptionally witty, quietly dignified, deeply curious, and above all, respectful and kind.
Speaker1	The thoughts he shared were never what I anticipated: reverent praise of my grammar, critiques of the font used on our picket signs, and literary and film recommendations as diverse as Marilynne Robinson’s Pulitzer Prize–winning novel Gilead and the comedy blockbuster The Hangover.
Speaker1	Apart from his typical questions about the church, he was all over the board and never where I expected.
Speaker1	I relished confounding his expectations, too.
Speaker1	Like many others, he’d arrived at my Twitter under the impression that my church was filled with hillbillies and rednecks, an assumption I was only too happy to dispel.
Speaker1	Upon my trumpeting of our Supreme Court victory, he learned that my family is full of lawyers, and I learned that it was a profession he shared—another piece of the puzzle that I meticulously filed away.
Speaker1	He was shocked to find that my grandfather had been honored by the NAACP for his civil rights work in Kansas.
Speaker1	Still anonymous, he wrote this message to a researcher who was looking into the ways Westboro used Twitter:
Speaker1	I became aware of WBC via Anonymous.
Speaker1	I immediately sent MPR a nasty tweet.
Speaker1	She responded in a charming way.
Speaker1	I was charmed.
Speaker1	I wiki’d WBC which led me to wiki Fred Phelps.
Speaker1	I learned that he, like me, was a lawyer.
Speaker1	I learned that he was a civil rights pioneer in Kansas, which was contrary to what I expected.
Speaker1	I studied more.
Speaker1	During that study, WBC won a Supreme Court decision I didn’t realize was pending.
Speaker1	Whether you love them or hate them or think they’re good or evil, you can’t deny that it’s a fascinating, complex American story.
Speaker1	If MPR hadn’t sent a witty, charming response to a nasty tweet from me, I wouldn’t know the first thing about WBC, and I wouldn’t have written this to you.
Speaker1	That’s the power of Twitter.
Speaker1	That’s influence.
Speaker1	That’s the power of an @.
Speaker1	Witty, he said.
Speaker1	Charming.
Speaker1	I found myself blushing at his compliments, but failed to recognize the deeper import of what he was saying.
Speaker1	It was only much later that I noticed the pattern, that the dynamic he described had played itself out repeatedly during my time on Twitter—among many others, it happened with a friendly college student in Canada, a sassy start-up employee in Chicago, a hilarious Australian guy who tweeted political jokes, even an American soldier to whom I had sent a care package in Afghanistan.
Speaker1	At the time I had been vaguely aware of the changes that communication on Twitter was working in me, but it was only in hindsight that its effects became clear.
Speaker1	The 140-character limit caused me to drastically cut back on my use of insults, which Westboro members made a habit of stringing together in long, alliterative lists: “bombastic, blowhard, bigmouth, bimbo, bastard.” Not only was there no space for insults in tweets, there was also an almost immediate feedback loop: unlike with email, I could watch a Twitter conversation derail in real time whenever I included personally disparaging language.
Speaker1	The exchange would swiftly devolve from a theological debate to a playground quarrel.
Speaker1	It became clear to me that causing offense with needless ad hominem attacks did nothing to communicate our core message, and I learned to avoid it.
Speaker1	Hostile tweeters became almost like a game to me, and I delighted in learning to use humor, pop culture, and self-deprecation to diffuse and disarm antagonism.
Speaker1	To change the nature of the conversation and convey our message in a way that outsiders could better hear it.
Speaker1	The tongue might be a fire, I was learning, but it didn’t always have to be.
Speaker1	“So, when do you drink the Kool-aid?” one guy tweeted at me.
Speaker1	“More of a Sunkist lemonade drinker, myself.
Speaker1	=)” I told him.
Speaker1	By long forbearing is a prince persuaded, and a soft tongue breaketh the bone.
Speaker1	Somewhere along the line, my anonymous lawyer bragged about his Words With Friends prowess, and I impulsively responded with my username in a hashtag.
Speaker1	Two days later, he started a match with me, and the game began in earnest.
Speaker1	I was about six when I first thought seriously about marriage.
Speaker1	Gramps had spoken from the pulpit one Sunday morning about the foundation for proper marriage: serving the Lord together.
Speaker1	Marrying an unbeliever was verboten, and for us, that meant only other Westboro members were permissible partners.
Speaker1	Since the church was composed almost entirely of my immediate and extended family, it occurred to my child mind that if I were ever to marry, it would have to be someone from outside, someone who hadn’t grown up in this peculiar faith of ours.
Speaker1	I’d been seeing outsiders on the picket line for about a year by then—angry, screeching, violent, wearers of neon muscle shirts and fanny packs—and I was afraid.
Speaker1	“What if I get married to someone who acts like a good person, but then it turns out they’re bad?
Speaker1	Gramps says you can’t get divorced.
Speaker1	What will happen to me, Mama?” I was clutching her hand as we walked down our street after school one sunny afternoon, my little tum churning with dread at the thought of being hoodwinked by one of Satan’s boys.
Speaker1	I’d only just conjured this scenario, but my thoughts were already tumbling all over themselves, my tendency toward melodrama completely unhelpful.
Speaker1	Instead of seeming like some far-off possibility, the danger felt real, immediate, pulsing from heart to limbs and back again.
Speaker1	“The Lord will keep you, little Meg.” My mama’s voice was gentle, reassuring.
Speaker1	“He knows the hearts of all men.
Speaker1	If you’re supposed to have a husband, the Lord knows how to make sure he’s a good one.
Speaker1	He won’t let us be tricked.” Her quiet certainty was calming.
Speaker1	She’s right, I thought.
Speaker1	The Lord will take care of us.
Speaker1	We have to trust Him.
Speaker1	They were the words I always heard the adults repeating.
Speaker1	My tiny death grip on her palm must have given away how truly scared I was, because she shook her head, laughing indulgently, and went on: “And anyway, you won’t have to think about that for a long, long time.”
Speaker1	I can’t remember exactly when or how I learned what sex was, but I was still six when I discovered that it was how babies were made.
Speaker1	My mom was pregnant with her seventh child, my baby sister Grace, and I gasped vociferously, with stark realization and something akin to horror.
Speaker1	“So you have had sex with Dad!” I accused her.
Speaker1	“Seven times!” I knew sex to be acceptable within the context of marriage, but only just; the practice was still highly questionable and suspect to my mind, and I couldn’t understand why anyone would risk it—especially my smart and pious parents.
Speaker1	I soon learned that sex wasn’t the only thing that could get you into trouble, though.
Speaker1	“Lust,” too, was dangerous and forbidden.
Speaker1	My mom explained it carefully to my siblings and me sitting around the living room during one of our daily Bible readings.
Speaker1	“Lust is a strong desire for something you’re not entitled to.
Speaker1	You cannot be said to ‘lust’ after your spouse, for instance, because that’s something you are entitled to.
Speaker1	The word doesn’t apply!” I vaguely understood that the context here was boys and girls, but my mind went straight to my little sister’s Barbies.
Speaker1	Bekah refused to let me play with them, but I’d always dreamed of combining our dolls into one giant collection, which I would then apportion between us as I deemed appropriate (the naked ones with the ratty hair and missing limbs would be hers, obviously).
Speaker1	I strongly desired to take control of her toys; was this lust?
Speaker1	I wasn’t positive, but Mom had already moved on, so it didn’t seem like the perfect time to ask.
Speaker1	“Then when lust hath conceived, it bringeth forth sin: and sin, when it is finished, bringeth forth death.” She was quoting James 1:15.
Speaker1	“You need to understand this, children.
Speaker1	Lust is the beginning of every sin, and death and Hell are the end of every sin.
Speaker1	Every evil thing arises from lust.
Speaker1	We have to be vigilant about it.
Speaker1	Don’t think that you’re special or strong, that you can just go down a lustful path in your mind and not have it affect your actions and behavior.
Speaker1	This is a truism: Then when lust hath conceived, it bringeth forth sin: and sin, when it is finished, bringeth forth death.
Speaker1	Make no mistake: lust will bring sin, and sin will bring death.
Speaker1	You have to cut it off, and not let it take root in your heart.”
Speaker1	She paired this verse with another, and they will be forever linked in my mind: Can a man take fire in his bosom, and his clothes not be burned?
Speaker1	It’s one of the Proverbs, captivating in its simplicity.
Speaker1	The imagery clearly hearkens back to Hell again, where most of our conversations eventually led.
Speaker1	The discussion continued one day when my mother came to my kindergarten class to have lunch with me.
Speaker1	On our way to the cafeteria, she spotted my first-grade cousin walking down the far end of the nearly empty hallway.
Speaker1	Mom suddenly seemed disturbed and disgusted.
Speaker1	“The way she walks is so inappropriate!”
Speaker1	“What do you mean, Mama?”
Speaker1	“She swishes her butt when she walks.
Speaker1	Do you see that?
Speaker1	She does it on purpose.
Speaker1	No one walks like that.”
Speaker1	I watched my cousin as she disappeared into the lunchroom, trying to see what my mother saw.
Speaker1	As far as I could tell it was the way she’d always walked, and I said so, confused.
Speaker1	“No.
Speaker1	She walks like that to get attention from boys.”
Speaker1	Ah, it dawned on me.
Speaker1	Lust.
Speaker1	Suddenly very aware of my gait, I began to walk stiffly, keeping my little hips as still as I could make them.
Speaker1	I asked my mom if I did that sort of thing when I walked, too.
Speaker1	She shook her head.
Speaker1	“No.
Speaker1	I’ll have to talk to her mom about it.
Speaker1	I’m worried about that girl.”
Speaker1	As my childhood years passed, and then my teenage ones, ever more praise was heaped on virgin marriages, and ever more vilification on any relationship outside of that.
Speaker1	There was no such thing as “dating” in this context.
Speaker1	God hated fornication, and having dinner alone with an unrelated member of the opposite sex would inexorably lead to fornication—or at the very least, it had the appearance of evil, which we were strictly instructed to avoid.
Speaker1	Even if a couple was engaged, there would be no kissing, and certainly no time to themselves, until after the vows.
Speaker1	If they didn’t have a chaperone at all times, there was the appearance of evil: the presumption would be that the betrothed had been in flagrante, their undefiled status would be called into question, and the church would have to suss out exactly what had happened during the time in question.
Speaker1	And although marriages weren’t terribly frequent at Westboro, it seemed like there was never any shortage of such matters for the church to suss out.
Speaker1	Before I was born and as I was growing up, several women in the church had relationships and children outside of marriage.
Speaker1	These affairs were calamitous and fearsome to behold, their devastating consequences seared into my young psyche like a white-hot brand.
Speaker1	I listened to the hushed conversations of the adults one evening, learning they centered around an aunt of mine who’d been wonderful and close with me since I was a babe; she’d take my siblings and me on drives to the park, recounting stories that sounded fascinating even though they were several levels above anything we could really grasp while our ages numbered in the single digits.
Speaker1	I didn’t understand all that had gone on with her, but words like “shameful,” “deliberate,” “willful,” “… with him?” and “I can’t think of anything worse” were thrown around, and I knew they meant sex.
Speaker1	For if we sin wilfully after that we have received the knowledge of the truth, there remaineth no more sacrifice for sins, But a certain fearful looking for of judgment and fiery indignation, which shall devour the adversaries.
Speaker1	The ominous warning, terror, and despair of this passage were all over my aunt’s face when it came time for the church to sit in judgment of her for the intolerable sin and havoc she’d wrought among the congregation.
Speaker1	We filed into the church sanctuary and took our places in our usual pews, the atmosphere filled with a dreadful heaviness.
Speaker1	For what seemed an excruciatingly long period, the adults soberly and dispassionately discussed the fate of this woman, whether she should be stripped of church membership in order to keep the church pure and to drive out the evil inside her.
Speaker1	Concerning him that hath so done this deed … deliver such an one unto Satan for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus.
Speaker1	To be excluded from the church was a terrifying proposition, the worst fate imaginable for a member of Westboro—a sure sign that you weren’t one of God’s elect but a reprobate destined for Hell.
Speaker1	If an excluded person found a way to convince the church that he’d truly repented, he could be granted membership again, but there were no guarantees.
Speaker1	As it became clear that the church was leaning toward excluding her from membership—unless and until she found a way to sufficiently demonstrate her repentance to them—anguished sobs racked her, contorting her face with shame and desperation as she begged for mercy and forgiveness.
Speaker1	Her young son, also, not yet a teenager, pleaded through tears that they not do this terrible thing to his mother.
Speaker1	But the church body, undeterred by their supplications, voted her out with no further discussion.
Speaker1	In the wake of this trauma, the behavior of my cousin became petrifying to me.
Speaker1	Jael, my dear friend the butt-swishing first-grader, grew into a coquettish middle-schooler, and the shenanigans that resulted were cause for great concern.
Speaker1	Abstain from fleshly lusts, which war against the soul.
Speaker1	She seemed to be constantly in trouble because of boys she was “messing around with.” In our lingo, this could mean just about anything from simple flirting to sex.
Speaker1	I always figured it couldn’t have been more than a kiss in Jael’s case, though that was still a sin egregious and inexcusable, a flagrant display of lust and the appearance of evil.
Speaker1	We saw these “innocent” flirtations as the beginnings of real danger that would end with the shame of being an unwed mother and the desolation of being voted out of the church.
Speaker1	When Jael got detention for a silly incident that involved hurling a spit wad at a boy, we were all deeply worried for her soul.
Speaker1	Her classmates from the church—my older brother and a few other cousins—were charged with keeping an eye on her at school and reporting any suspicious behavior.
Speaker1	The following year, I joined the middle school crowd and that responsibility fell to me, as well.
Speaker1	A few weeks before I was set to start at my new school, I walked across our backyard and into the church.
Speaker1	My siblings and I would take turns having sleepovers there with Gran and Gramps, often several times a week during the summer months.
Speaker1	Gramps’s room was the master bedroom upstairs, but Gran usually slept in a recliner in the downstairs room with the fireplace.
Speaker1	We would always join Gran and watch marathons of I Love Lucy, Bewitched, or, if we were unlucky, Bonanza.
Speaker1	On this night, Gran and I stayed up late watching Lucy, and when the time came, she turned off the TV, I flipped off the light, and we each settled under our covers.