Speaker1	He preached extensively about the believer’s duty to be able by sound doctrine both to exhort and to convince the gainsayers.
Speaker1	“Convince means confute!” he would say.
Speaker1	“It means to overwhelm them with sound arguments, logic, and evidence, to prove the folly of their position.” I knew I would need to practice if I wanted to join Gramps in declaring with the Apostle Paul, I am set for the defence of the gospel.
Speaker1	Hunched over the keys of the living room computer, I continued to pore over the message boards whenever I had a spare moment.
Speaker1	The accusations kept coming.
Speaker1	One impugned my grandfather’s motives in battling racism, saying his goals were not moral but financial, that he only represented blacks because he could make money off of them: exploitation of the black cause masquerading as noble sacrifice.
Speaker1	“I made a lot of money,” my grandfather told the Capital Journal, “I have to admit that.” I couldn’t accept this view.
Speaker1	I’d heard Gramps preach against racism with the same venom he employed against gays, and it was clear that he saw his civil rights work in the same way he saw our daily picketing—as a moral imperative.
Speaker1	I noted a similar accusation people made about our protesting, too, the insistence that the true heart of Westboro was an elaborate scheme to make money.
Speaker1	We would provoke onlookers into assaulting us on the picket line, they proffered, and then we would sue both our attackers and the police for failing to protect us.
Speaker1	Such a scenario never played out even a single time, but that never stopped people from believing it was true.
Speaker1	It struck me that this desire to exchange a financial motive for an ideological one was a convenient evasion of a distressing truth: it was easier to dismiss our stated intentions than to acknowledge that people who were otherwise bright and well-intentioned could believe and behave as we did as members of Westboro.
Speaker1	I didn’t want to bring too many of these Internet accusations to my mother, so I reasoned with myself about whether the money my grandfather had earned devalued his civil rights work.
Speaker1	Didn’t my grandparents have thirteen children to support?
Speaker1	Was it wrong for him to try to make a good living for them?
Speaker1	And hadn’t he represented many people who couldn’t pay him at all?
Speaker1	If he hadn’t made money on the cases he won, he couldn’t have afforded to represent those who didn’t have money.
Speaker1	Was justice only for the rich?
Speaker1	Defend the poor and fatherless: do justice to the afflicted and needy.
Speaker1	Deliver the poor and needy: rid them out of the hand of the wicked.
Speaker1	This allegation, too, was a nonstarter for me.
Speaker1	But there was another that nearly proved ruinous.
Speaker1	Rumors of extreme child abuse had filtered in and out of my awareness for almost as many years as I had memories.
Speaker1	Their source: the two uncles whom I had never met, Mark and Nate.
Speaker1	I knew to find them odious and repugnant from the way my mother and her siblings spoke of them, even when ostensibly paying them a compliment.
Speaker1	“Those two boys were very smart, probably smarter than many of us who’re still here—but they thought they were smarter than God.” My aunt’s voice was loaded with derision.
Speaker1	“They’re just rebels, and that’s all there is to it.” The dismissal was final, the door to discussion firmly shut.
Speaker1	Except it wasn’t.
Speaker1	The rumors resurfaced time and again, and had even been printed in a series of articles the Capital Journal had published about my grandfather in 1994: “Hate for the Love of God.” Reporters Steve Fry and Joe Taschler had done extensive research into my grandfather’s past, looking up childhood friends and neighbors, interviewing classmates, and chronicling the evolution of the man who had laid siege to the city of Topeka with more than three years of daily protesting against all who crossed him.
Speaker1	They had also found his estranged sons, then living in California.
Speaker1	Mark and Nate described brutal violence: beatings that lasted for hours as my grandfather yelled and cursed them, the heavy leather straps and a mattock handle he used, bloodcurdling screams, bruises on top of bruises that would split open their skin.
Speaker1	The eerie joy he took at their pain, grinning at the wounds he had caused.
Speaker1	There were so many examples, so many specifics.
Speaker1	Publicly, my mom and her siblings always vehemently denied the stories told by their estranged brothers: no, they had not been abused—only spanked.
Speaker1	Disciplined.
Speaker1	Their brothers were just angry because they hated God.
Speaker1	Because they wanted to fornicate and commit adultery and live as they pleased.
Speaker1	Those two boys were throwing a public hissy fit because they didn’t want to obey their father or the Lord, and they didn’t want anyone to interfere with their disobedience.
Speaker1	Incredulity would creep into the voices of reporters as they somberly repeated my uncles’ allegations for comment: Was my mother really going to suggest that every one of her brothers’ stories was entirely exaggerated?
Speaker1	Was she going to deny that there had been any abuse at all?
Speaker1	She was, indeed.
Speaker1	Her siblings would deny it, as well, though they avoided addressing it whenever possible.
Speaker1	They’d laugh out loud at the reporter’s queries and ask rhetorical questions intended to shame him for his lack of insight: Would nine of the thirteen Phelps children have remained at Westboro if they’d been subjected to savage abuse?
Speaker1	How was it that the loyal children were all so well-educated and professionally accomplished—meanwhile, Nathan had dropped out of school and was driving a cab for a living?
Speaker1	My grandfather also dismissed their charges, telling the Capital Journal, “Hardly a word of truth to that stuff.
Speaker1	Those boys didn’t want to stay in this church.
Speaker1	It was too hard.
Speaker1	They took up with girls they liked, and the last thing them girls was gonna do was come into this church.
Speaker1	These boys wanted to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season.
Speaker1	I can’t blame them.
Speaker1	I just feel sorry for them that they’re not bound for the promised land.”
Speaker1	At home, other details painted a more complicated picture.
Speaker1	My mother and her siblings dodged the word “abuse,” and always maintained that Mark and Nathan were liars—but even at thirteen, I recognized the obfuscation.
Speaker1	I knew my uncles could be “liars” (technically, weren’t we all liars?
Speaker1	), and still be telling the truth on this question.
Speaker1	My grandfather had nearly always been gentle and sweet to me, and I would forever strive to earn his approval.
Speaker1	I found such joy in being his go-to tech assistant, my phone number written on a Post-it and taped to his computer screen.
Speaker1	At his slightest erroneous mouse click, I’d take off running through the backyard, in the church’s west door, up the stairs, and into his office.
Speaker1	Once, when I was demonstrating the correct keystrokes to save his work, he showed me the icon he clicked—“that little button,” he called it—to accomplish the same thing.
Speaker1	We looked at the icon together for a second, and I said, “It’s actually an old floppy disc.” Gramps laughed.
Speaker1	“That sounds like what I feel!
Speaker1	An old, floppy, disc.” We cracked up, and as always, he gave me a hug and a kiss on the cheek to see me out.
Speaker1	“I think I’ll take that as my new nickname!” he declared.
Speaker1	For the work I did for the ministry, for my aptitude in memorizing and defending church doctrines, and for my increasingly loud and zealous voice for Westboro in the media, I had my grandfather’s approval, and he liberally showed me his love and praise.
Speaker1	“I just love all that good work you do, sug’.
Speaker1	I love it, I love it, I love it!
Speaker1	You learned how to put together a sentence like that from your ol’ Gramps, didn’tcha?
Speaker1	Ha!” That little twinkle in his eye when he’d tease us, and then toss his head back and chuckle …
Speaker1	But growing up, I was also a bit afraid of him, of what would happen if I stepped out of line.
Speaker1	The few times I gave him occasion to be dissatisfied with me—as when I failed to play a hymn at the correct tempo the single time I was accompanist at our Sunday church service—he berated me without pity, his harsh temper provoked at the slightest displeasure.
Speaker1	The fear I had was also passed down by my parents’ generation, by the way they spoke of anything that might upset or disappoint my grandfather: in hushed tones with intense strategizing about the best way to reveal a problem to him.
Speaker1	It was not uncommon to hear, “Stay clear, Daddy’s throwing one of his fits again!”
Speaker1	And then there was my mother.
Speaker1	Sometimes she seemed exhausted just thinking about the years growing up with her father.
Speaker1	The Phelps children spent long days at school, followed by hours of selling boxes of candy on the streets of Topeka, Kansas City, Wichita, to support the family and the church, followed by a daily ten-mile run.
Speaker1	My grandfather had found the running program on the back of a Wheaties box and forced all his children to join him in following it—even the ones in elementary school.
Speaker1	When he decided they would start training for marathons, their Saturday mileage increased to twenty-six.
Speaker1	“His motto has always been, ‘If a little’s good, a lot’s better.’ No moderation, always to the extreme,” my mother told me more than once.
Speaker1	When they ran the Heart of America marathon in Columbia, Missouri, my uncle Tim was the youngest to compete.
Speaker1	He’d turned seven just a few weeks before the race.
Speaker1	It took him seven hours to finish.
Speaker1	Runner’s World thought it was a great story and published it in their November 1970 issue, which hung proudly on the wall of the church office next to the Time profile.
Speaker1	“We were too young to be doin’ that—sellin’ candy and runnin’ like that,” my mom would say.
Speaker1	“Too damn young.
Speaker1	He shouldn’t have had us out there like that, and that’s all there is to it.
Speaker1	Nothin’ to do about it now, though.”
Speaker1	It was in the past.
Speaker1	Gramps didn’t do that anymore.
Speaker1	Such was the essence of the position my mother took when I came to her one day in tears of outrage and despair: my sleuthing on the message boards had led me to a book.
Speaker1	It had been referenced a few dozen times before my curiosity got the better of me.
Speaker1	I knew it was full of lies, per my parents.
Speaker1	They explained that even the Capital Journal—certainly no friend of ours—had refused to print what they referred to as an “agenda-driven” manuscript.
Speaker1	The ex-intern who’d authored the book had been fired by the newspaper “as a result of our inability to place any reliance on his judgment and his work product.
Speaker1	His actions as an employee here were unprofessional and ethically questionable.” I clicked the link and began to read.
Speaker1	An hour later, wailing with an anguish the likes of which I’d never known, I stormed out of the living room and into my mother’s office.
Speaker1	She jumped out of her chair and rushed over.
Speaker1	“Is it true?
Speaker1	!” I demanded, hardly able to force my mouth to form words around the sobs, doubling over as I folded myself into her arms.
Speaker1	This was not a tone I ever took with my mother, but I had no control.
Speaker1	I had not asked her about all the accusations I’d found on those message boards.
Speaker1	I needed to ask her about this.
Speaker1	“Is what true?!
Speaker1	Is what true?
Speaker1	!”
Speaker1	“Gran!” I squalled.
Speaker1	The writer’s detailing of my grandfather’s child abuse had made me gasp as I read, yet I’d managed to hold on to the lifeline that this was not a trustworthy account.
Speaker1	But when I read of my six-foot-three Gramps going after my tiny, gentle Gran decades earlier—punching her, beating her with heavy implements, dislocating her shoulder by throwing her down the stairs, and cutting her hair to the scalp because she wasn’t sufficiently in subjection to him—I instantly came apart.
Speaker1	This was a reality I could not bear to consider.
Speaker1	It contradicted everything I knew about my faith and my family, everything I needed to believe.
Speaker1	That we were righteous.
Speaker1	That we were loving.
Speaker1	That we were the good guys.
Speaker1	The truth was that my grandfather’s remarkable lack of self-restraint couldn’t help but extend to his discipline.
Speaker1	And despite all the practice I had in denying it, I knew it.
Speaker1	I had known only echoes of Gramps’s rage through my mother, but the intensity of even those echoes had been a frequent source of terror for my siblings and me—the way it transformed the features of my mother, twisting them into something sharp and menacing and filled with violence.
Speaker1	I pushed away the memories of my five-year-old self, the nightmares that ensued when I failed to learn the week’s piano lesson.
Speaker1	Withhold not correction from the child: for if thou beatest him with the rod, he shall not die.
Speaker1	Thou shalt beat him with the rod, and shalt deliver his soul from hell.
Speaker1	I’d cry out hysterically with each stroke of the wooden paddle until she finally stopped, but when I’d return to the piano bench a blubbering wreck, Mom wouldn’t leave me to work.
Speaker1	Instead she’d slam the paddle down on the piano top and sit down next to me.
Speaker1	“Go,” she would snarl, though I was shaking and could hardly see the music through tears.
Speaker1	Chasten thy son while there is hope, and let not thy soul spare for his crying.
Speaker1	There was no way to concentrate with her beside me, and yet she would sit for the next hour, yelling, jabbing the beat into my shoulder, yanking me up for another spanking every few minutes, the force of the blows rising with her ire.
Speaker1	More discordant notes would ring out when she smacked the tops of my hands, smashing my little fingers into the keys.
Speaker1	He that spareth his rod hateth his son: but he that loveth him chasteneth him betimes.
Speaker1	My mother rarely mentioned her father’s abuse directly, but it was apparent nonetheless.
Speaker1	It was in her tone when she spoke of her father “always going too far.
Speaker1	His policy was to beat first and ask questions later.” It was in her despair when she would recall being “at—his—mercy!” It was in the way she responded to the howls of her children as she disciplined us: “These kids don’t know how good they have it!” Her outrage at our distress made it clear that whatever she was doing to us wasn’t even in the same league as what her father had done to her and her siblings.
Speaker1	The Bible required strict discipline, but in her mind, she was delivering a more moderate version to my siblings and me.
Speaker1	My mother didn’t tell me until I was twenty-five—almost surely because of the way I responded to the discovery of this book at thirteen—that her father had done permanent injury to her.
Speaker1	She would have chronic pain for the rest of her life.
Speaker1	“Stop it, stop it!” she pleaded, holding on to me.
Speaker1	“No, it’s not true!
Speaker1	And even if it were, you don’t think he’s doing that stuff today, do ya?
Speaker1	!”
Speaker1	“No,” I admitted.
Speaker1	I needed to let myself be comforted.
Speaker1	I needed her to convince me that it wasn’t true.
Speaker1	“And if it were true, d’you think it’d be right to keep beatin’ a guy up for old sins?” Of course it wasn’t.
Speaker1	We believed in repentance and forgiveness.
Speaker1	If a person changed, their past had no bearing on the present.
Speaker1	For I will be merciful to their unrighteousness, and their sins and their iniquities will I remember no more.
Speaker1	“I don’t want you reading that stuff anymore!
Speaker1	There’s no value in it!
Speaker1	Go shut that down, and don’t be goin’ back to it.” I was only too relieved to let her direct me away from these thoughts, because pressing at the edge of my consciousness was an uncomfortable parallel: between my grandfather’s physical brutality on the one hand, and the way our church responded to the suffering of outsiders on the other.
Speaker1	Our joy at their demise.
Speaker1	Our delight at their destruction.
Speaker1	I took my leave of this line of thought and accepted the shield of my mother’s instruction, because I needed to believe that our ministry had not been influenced by the pathologies of a human being.
Speaker1	I needed to see that Westboro’s monopoly on truth would continue to stand.
Speaker1	I needed to know that the past had no bearing on the present.
Speaker1	I could never bring myself to ask my mother about one of my earliest memories of her.
Speaker1	In my child mind, I’m alone in the living room, playing with blocks on the floor.
Speaker1	Suddenly I’m looking up across the room at Mom and her twenty-something sister Dortha—Dottie, we called her—by the half wall with the wooden columns to the ceiling.
Speaker1	They’re screaming at each other, and Mom grabs Dottie by the hair and yanks hard.
Speaker1	She grabs Dottie’s arm and digs long fingernails into her flesh.
Speaker1	I know it hurts, because she does it to me when I misbehave.
Speaker1	Four little crescent moons.
Speaker1	This is the beginning.
Speaker1	This was how you taught obedience.
Speaker1	Until fear of God replaced fear of pain, this was how you learned obedience.
Speaker1	Come, ye children, hearken unto me: I will teach you the fear of the Lord.
Speaker1	My grandfather lost his license to practice law in federal court in February 1989.
Speaker1	My mother could give me a detailed explanation of the state court disbarment from ten years earlier, complete with objective legal experts to support her conclusions, but I never understood how she rationalized the “nine-judge complaint” that came close to decimating the Phelps-Chartered law firm—nothing beyond “These people were always coming after us.
Speaker1	They hated us.” She dismissed the charges filed against seven of the firm’s attorneys as “our annual Disbarment Rites of Spring,” as she and her siblings had begun to call them: trumped-up charges filed with the goal of shutting down our family’s civil rights work.
Speaker1	In the disciplinary complaint, nine senior federal judges charged that my grandfather, my mother, and five of my aunts and uncles had made false accusations against them, and that they all deserved to be disbarred.
Speaker1	A prolonged investigation ensued, one that found that Phelps-Chartered lawyers had violated the Code of Professional Responsibility.
Speaker1	More than three years after the complaint was filed, my grandfather surrendered his license in exchange for the federal judges allowing my mother, aunts, and uncles to continue practicing in the federal courts.
Speaker1	Nearly a decade later, my Gramps would commemorate the death of one of those nine judges in his Sunday sermon—a celebration of the murder-suicide in which the judge and his wife were both found dead, his courthouse revolver on the bed between them.
Speaker1	And shall not God avenge his own elect, which cry day and night unto him?
Speaker1	I tell you that he will avenge them speedily.
Speaker1	Many years later, I would email to ask my aunt Dottie about the disciplinary complaint that finally ended my grandfather’s legal career.
Speaker1	I hadn’t seen her since the incident I’d witnessed in my living room at age four, my only childhood memory of her being the moment she chose to leave Westboro forever.
Speaker1	I wasn’t sure I could trust her.
Speaker1	Reading her account of those days, the first thing that leapt out at me was the timeline—a connection I had missed all my life.
Speaker1	Gramps had surrendered his law license in the spring of 1989, the end of his decades of successful and acclaimed civil rights work.
Speaker1	At nearly sixty years old, he was suddenly and unwillingly facing an enormous vacuum in his life—and just a few months later, the biking incident at Gage Park with my brother Josh and the two men emerging from the bushes.
Speaker1	The end of one crusade leading directly into the beginning of another.
Speaker1	Dottie also asserted that her father’s removal from the federal court was justified, recounting a scene of deliberate lies and fabrication of evidence that I found difficult to imagine.
Speaker1	As I pondered her assertions for a moment, trying to determine whether my family was capable of such things, an uncomfortable memory surfaced.
Speaker1	In my twenties, my mother and her siblings agreed to be interviewed once more on the subject of their father’s abuse, but only because it would get Westboro a platform on the Oprah Winfrey Network, a show hosted by Rosie O’Donnell.
Speaker1	My uncle Nate had been interviewed, and the producers wanted to give us an opportunity to respond to his claims.
Speaker1	Stomach twisting, I watched the interview the day it was published, expecting my family to cleverly evade the grisly accusations, to tell selective truths, to employ misdirection.
Speaker1	These were all deceptive tactics, I knew, but I was consoled by the fact that they weren’t outright lies.
Speaker1	The truth was important to me—it was our defense against the never-ending attacks that came at us every day—and I anxiously wondered what Nate was going to say and just how my family would be able to respond honestly without hurting the church.
Speaker1	The answer was that they couldn’t.
Speaker1	There sat my mother, four aunts, and two uncles—all in their forties and fifties by this point—giggling at the reporter’s grim questions, all pretending they had no idea what Nathan could possibly be referring to.
Speaker1	“I don’t even know what a barber strap is!” said one incredulously.
Speaker1	“Does he have a picture or something, so that we might know what he’s talking about?” another derided.
Speaker1	“Nate always had an overactive imagination.” The smugness and condescension stunned me.
Speaker1	The footage went on for nearly twenty minutes, and it was painful to watch.
Speaker1	“There wasn’t any physical abuse, just forget that!” “They used to call it spanking!” As if it were all just a confusion of terms.
Speaker1	“Did you feel emotionally abused as a child?” the producer asked quietly.
Speaker1	They erupted in laughter.
Speaker1	“Do you mean by Nathan?”
Speaker1	They went on at length about Nathan’s shortcomings as a child—“disruptive, destructive, distressing”—and I sat there mouth agape at the double standard.
Speaker1	My family would never stop harping on the sins of Nathan’s youth, but would lay none of the responsibility at the feet of their father.
Speaker1	Nate was to be held forever accountable for not conforming, for not just learning to fear and obey the way that they had all learned to.
Speaker1	My mom and her siblings were holding Nate to account for the chaotic state of their childhood home—but they never would with Gramps.
Speaker1	Because Gramps had stayed.
Speaker1	And Nate had left.
Speaker1	A vexing thought began to take hold.
Speaker1	As members of Westboro, we behaved as if everyone in all the world were accountable to us, as if they all were steadfastly bound to obey our preaching—because we were the only ones who knew the true meaning of God’s Word.
Speaker1	Presidents and kings, judges and governors, Princess Diana and Mother Teresa—all were subject to our understanding and our judgment.
Speaker1	And all the while, we ourselves were accountable to no one outside our fences.
Speaker1	But he that is spiritual judgeth all things, yet he himself is judged of no man.
Speaker1	For who hath known the mind of the Lord, that he may instruct him?
Speaker1	But we have the mind of Christ.
Speaker1	Who would have the audacity to contradict the mind of Christ?
Speaker1	Nathan had dared to question the judgment of the church, and he had faced our collective wrath as a result.
Speaker1	The facts were in Nate’s story, but we said he was fabricating it all in order to make a name for himself off of the church.
Speaker1	“But go ahead and write some books and whatnot,” one of my uncles scoffed.
Speaker1	“We don’t really care.” We dismissed Nathan as being driven by the same pecuniary motive people falsely assigned to us, and for partly the same reason: to avoid facing an uncomfortable truth, a blurring of the line between the good guys and the bad.
Speaker1	So we called the truth a lie and rewrote history—as though it were in our power to dictate reality so long as it was in the church’s judgment and interest.
Speaker1	So long as we all held the line, no one could prevail against us.
Speaker1	We were the Jacobs.
Speaker1	We were always under Satan’s attack.
Speaker1	We had to protect ourselves.
Speaker1	I was beginning to see that our first loyalty was not to the truth but to the church.
Speaker1	That for us, the church was the truth, and disloyalty was the only sin unforgivable.
Speaker1	This was the true Westboro legacy.
Speaker1	I walked away from the video and pushed the troubling thoughts away, knowing without thinking that Nate would go away at the end of this news cycle and something else would take his place.
Speaker1	I wouldn’t have to think about it anymore.
Speaker1	I instinctively held on to the hope that had carried me through all the storms we’d weathered at Westboro.
Speaker1	As long as I stayed and did what I was told—as long as I believed—everything would turn out okay.
