Speaker1	chapter eight.
Speaker1	Strangers and Pilgrims
Speaker1	We’d been on the road for a few hours by the time I realized I was white-knuckling the steering wheel.
Speaker1	There weren’t many cars at that early hour, but the image would have seemed comical to anyone passing me driving north on I-29.
Speaker1	Leaning forward with my face hovering just behind the dash, whole body clenched, I looked like the stereotypical grandmother with poor vision trying to navigate during rush hour.
Speaker1	Had my sister not been sleeping in the passenger seat, she surely would have made fun.
Speaker1	I unclenched my fists and tried to relax in my seat—only to realize a few minutes later that in the absence of conscious effort, my body had resumed its original position.
Speaker1	I gave up.
Speaker1	It was mid-December, and Grace and I were more than ready to get out of Kansas.
Speaker1	Just over a month had passed since I’d last seen my parents, and confusion had reigned in the interim.
Speaker1	After so many years of a life micromanaged by my mother, I now felt paralyzed each time I had to render an opinion about what steps to take next—as if decision-making were a muscle that had long since atrophied from disuse.
Speaker1	At home, everything I did, everywhere I went, how long I’d be gone, everything had been pre-approved, double-checked, and tightly controlled.
Speaker1	The multiplicity of rules was sometimes cause for frustration, but it was also a source of great confidence: I’d known what was required of me.
Speaker1	I’d known who I was, and where I fit into the world.
Speaker1	What did it mean to be the good girl in a world with no rules?
Speaker1	I was unmoored.
Speaker1	Outside of Westboro’s rigid system, fear and uncertainty now consumed me, a physical weight that I felt from the first morning I awoke in my cousin Libby’s house and every day thereafter: a boulder sitting on my chest, crushing my lungs, blocking any attempt to see around it.
Speaker1	I couldn’t breathe.
Speaker1	I couldn’t move.
Speaker1	I was terrified of making a decision that would land my sister and me in some horrific situation.
Speaker1	Homeless.
Speaker1	Friendless.
Speaker1	Penniless.
Speaker1	At the same time, the pressure to make every decision right now was staggering.
Speaker1	I was keenly aware that Grace and I had a little bit of time and a little bit of money, and that both would be gone in no time at all.
Speaker1	I needed to find a way to take care of us.
Speaker1	I needed to be responsible.
Speaker1	I needed a job immediately—since I’d graduated from Washburn four years earlier, I’d only worked for the family law firm, which was clearly no longer a possibility.
Speaker1	And if the apocalypse wasn’t imminent, as Westboro had been proclaiming for years, then I was behind in heeding the counsel of my business professors by nearly a decade already.
Speaker1	Two days after leaving Westboro, I panicked to Newbery: “I need to start saving for retirement!” It was a stand-in for my every failure to prepare for this life, and the adrenaline coursing through me was not appeased by Newbery’s assurances that I had plenty of time to figure things out.
Speaker1	And beneath the urgency and the loss and the yawning chasm of uncertainty, there was a deeper sort of terror: that no matter what I did, I was spinning my wheels in a futile effort to outpace the wrath of God reserved for the children of disobedience.
Speaker1	My grip on the steering wheel tightened as I imagined my little black Pontiac spinning off into a ditch, smashing into a concrete divide, crumpling into a mass of metal and broken bones protruding from torn, sizzling flesh resting in pools of blood after a head-on collision with a southbound semi and—
Speaker1	Stop!
Speaker1	I ordered myself.
Speaker1	I unclenched my fists again.
Speaker1	Sat back.
Speaker1	Slowed my breath.
Speaker1	Tried to still the tremors in my limbs.
Speaker1	I looked out the window, where no grisly scene awaited.
Speaker1	The sun was bright and the fields along the interstate were vast and glistening with frost.
Speaker1	Iowa, just after 8 A.M.
Speaker1	I glanced over at my sleeping sister in the passenger seat.
Speaker1	Though we shared our grief and fear, Grace’s disposition could not have been more of a contrast to mine.
Speaker1	Where I wanted to cautiously reason and agonize over each decision, she seemed possessed by every emotion that came over her.
Speaker1	Whatever she felt in any given moment was a call to action that needed no review and no revision, and she didn’t appreciate my offering them.
Speaker1	When Grace had first suggested an escape in the days after we left—running away to France was her actual proposal—I rejected the idea.
Speaker1	She couldn’t possibly be serious, could she?
Speaker1	“If we can’t have our family,” I’d told her, both of us in tears, “then it doesn’t matter if we’re thirty minutes away from them or three thousand miles.
Speaker1	Nothing will bring them back to us.” I had argued that running away from that reality wouldn’t change anything; it would only waste our ever-dwindling resources.
Speaker1	She had just a few weeks left of the semester, anyway.
Speaker1	Did she want to waste all the effort she’d already put in?
Speaker1	None of these practicalities moved my sister.
Speaker1	She was still determined to go, weeping in desperate frustration and despair that I refused.
Speaker1	If I truly cared about her, Grace reasoned, then I would go with her.
Speaker1	But after two weeks, I’d started to realize that Grace was right.
Speaker1	It did matter that we were still so close to home.
Speaker1	I’d thought that staying with Libby and her husband would be ideal: Libby had been one of my best friends before she left Westboro three and a half years earlier, and I thought we could pick up right where we left off.
Speaker1	And while spending time with her helped me start to find some perspective—not to mention comic relief—it quickly became clear that the thirty miles between Westboro and her home in Lawrence weren’t nearly enough.
Speaker1	We were commuting to Topeka four days a week for Grace’s classes, and though it was a city of 140,000, we seemed to run into our family everywhere.
Speaker1	We saw them while driving by pickets on the way to school.
Speaker1	At the mall.
Speaker1	The university.
Speaker1	I was shopping for groceries while Grace was in class one evening, turning into an aisle only to immediately duck back around the corner—there was Margie, reaching for an item on the top shelf at the far end.
Speaker1	When I spoke to Newbery of these incidents, he didn’t seem to understand my overpowering physiological need to conceal myself from their gaze, and I couldn’t explain it.
Speaker1	No, they wouldn’t yell at me.
Speaker1	They wouldn’t attack me or otherwise make a scene.
Speaker1	They would just pretend that I didn’t exist.
Speaker1	To say that I hid to avoid judgment and the silent treatment could not convey or justify the depths of that savage instinct to hide, but it was the best I could come up with.
Speaker1	I couldn’t bear to think of the things my siblings would hear from the rest of the church members, who made it a habit to report back whenever they saw ex-members.
Speaker1	If Grace and I seemed in good spirits, we would be considered foolish and bestial, not recognizing how vain and worthless our lives now were.
Speaker1	If we seemed mournful, we were pathetic, feeling the sentence of death in ourselves.
Speaker1	In their eyes, we would never be truly happy—and we were delusional if we thought we could be.
Speaker1	And then there were the messages from church members that stopped my heart each time they appeared on my phone’s screen.
Speaker1	They’d begun back at home, the moment word got to the rest of the church that Grace and I were leaving, but I had assumed they would stop once we were gone.
Speaker1	They did not.
Speaker1	Gran texted me the morning following our departure: “You need to consider the rebellion of Korah!!!!
Speaker1	FLEE the wrath to come!” Jael sent several text messages and emails, as well, and she had changed my name to “Korah” in her phone.
Speaker1	In a way, it was nice to know the narrative church members were spinning in my absence.
Speaker1	Korah was a biblical figure who publicly challenged the legitimacy of Moses’s leadership over the children of Israel.
Speaker1	As a result, God made a spectacular display of demonstrating that He had chosen Moses: He caused the earth to open up and swallow Korah, his cohorts, and their families—including their little children.
Speaker1	They, and all that appertained to them, went down alive into the pit, and the earth closed upon them: and they perished from among the congregation.
Speaker1	Afterward, God had sent fire and then a fast-moving plague to kill all who supported Korah.
Speaker1	At the end of it all, about fifteen thousand were dead.
Speaker1	On receiving these messages from Gran and Jael, I’d read the story again and was struck by how much my complaints about Westboro’s elders sounded like Korah’s complaint against Moses: Ye take too much upon you, seeing all the congregation are holy, every one of them, and the Lord is among them: wherefore then lift ye up yourselves above the congregation of the Lord?
Speaker1	A pang of fear had gripped me, but I’d thought for a moment.
Speaker1	Moses had been established as the Lord’s chosen leader via direct interaction with God Himself and a series of miracles—among them the parting of the Red Sea, the pillar of cloud that led the Israelites by day, and the pillar of fire that gave them light by night.
Speaker1	Westboro’s elders had no such evidence to support their claim to unquestionable authority, and quite the opposite: their legacy was a series of unscriptural edicts and contradictory doctrines.
Speaker1	They were not Moses.
Speaker1	I was not Korah.
Speaker1	And I would not be intimidated by their decision to paint me as such.
Speaker1	In truth, once the first wave of fear passed, the comparison even struck me as genuinely funny: in place of a man who’d incited the revolt of thousands, there was me, perennial nerd and consummate good girl, leading a rebellion of two alongside my sundress-wearing sidekick.
Speaker1	They gave us—and themselves—far too much credit.
Speaker1	Still, I remembered back to the days just after Josh left.
Speaker1	Anger and indignation had been so much easier to tolerate than grief.
Speaker1	The messages kept coming.
Speaker1	One of my aunts called to tell me that I had destroyed my sister.
Speaker1	“It’s because of you that Grace has been able to go down this path to certain destruction.
Speaker1	You weren’t content to take your own soul to Hell—you had to drag your sister down with you.” Her voice had sounded cautious at first, but quickly took on a vicious disgust.
Speaker1	I didn’t know what to say.
Speaker1	There was a good chance that she was right, and that things would go horribly wrong.
Speaker1	I knew I couldn’t take responsibility for Grace’s decisions, but if she got hurt, there was no way I wouldn’t blame myself.
Speaker1	Two weeks after our departure, I received a text message from Margie accusing me of modesty violations and of fabricating reasons to leave because of my “lust.” Since I had been dressing exactly the same since leaving Westboro, I was confused.
Speaker1	We went back and forth for a little while, and I tried to reiterate some of the actual reasons I left, but she just couldn’t hear me.
Speaker1	She could acknowledge no wrongdoing on the part of the church.
Speaker1	This, she insisted, was all my fault.
Speaker1	“If your heart gets broken and you are ashamed,” she wrote, “reach out.
Speaker1	Otherwise this is done.” I had sighed.
Speaker1	Clearly, there was no point in continuing the conversation, and I cried to Newbery in bitter frustration.
Speaker1	NEWBERY: I guess it’s important to remember that they are trying to deal with this, too.
Speaker1	They don’t know what to do any more than you do, but what they do still have is the church and the “certainty” that comes with that.
Speaker1	And it’s all they have to try to find answers and deal with it.
Speaker1	I suppose that’s a long way to go to get to an idea that is much harder than it sounds, which is: I think you need to try not to take it personally.
Speaker1	The only aunt and cousin I think you *really* need to remember is the one you knew when you were still there.
Speaker1	The rest is just coping and probably fear.
Speaker1	I remembered what it was like on that side of this divide, and I knew that Newbery was right.
Speaker1	But I was dismayed to realize that even while paying the enormous cost of leaving Westboro, Grace and I were still under the judgmental gaze of its members.
Speaker1	How could we possibly move on while living in the shadow of the church?
Speaker1	It was time to go.
Speaker1	Just beyond the WELCOME TO SOUTH DAKOTA sign, the speed limit bumped up to 75 miles an hour.
Speaker1	I hit the gas and barreled on.
Speaker1	We arrived at our destination at 4:15 P.M., just as the sun was setting over the Black Hills.
Speaker1	I’d first seen them on the horizon about an hour earlier, rising ominously from a dense mist toward thick cloud cover that had cast a pall over everything since we’d crossed the Missouri River around midday.
Speaker1	Grace read the Wikipedia page aloud: “The hills were so-called because of their dark appearance from a distance, as they were covered in trees.” As we drew nearer, I realized it was true—an endless array of pine.
Speaker1	Grace looked up from her phone and we stared out at the clusters of trees with every branch and needle covered in a delicate sheet of ice.
Speaker1	The fog made it seem like they sprang up and frosted just for our eyes’ amusement.
Speaker1	“It looks like Narnia,” she marveled.
Speaker1	The road through Black Hills National Forest wasn’t especially icy, but I steered around the sharp curves with overmuch caution anyway.
Speaker1	My eyes kept darting away from the road to a series of small signs reading WHY DIE?—memorials for victims of fatal car crashes, I would learn later—which further elevated my sense of foreboding.
Speaker1	The question called to mind a verse my mother referenced often.
Speaker1	Cast away from you all your transgressions, whereby ye have transgressed; and make you a new heart and a new spirit: for why will ye die, O house of Israel?
Speaker1	“Repent!” I could hear my mother say.
Speaker1	“Why will ye die?
Speaker1	!”
Speaker1	Twelve hours on the road had landed Grace and me here in Deadwood.
Speaker1	My sister had wanted to go to a beach, but I was afraid to spend that kind of money.
Speaker1	I thought we should find a destination that was less expensive and reachable by car, and I’d been drawn to Deadwood for several reasons.
Speaker1	Its isolation and beauty.
Speaker1	The fact that my brother Sam had been a fan of HBO’s television series by the same name.
Speaker1	And though there was no chance of running into C.G.
Speaker1	on this trip—his home was 400 miles away—some pathetic part of me was heartened at the prospect of sharing his beloved home state for a while.
Speaker1	Having just learned about the home-sharing company Airbnb, I’d searched their website for “Deadwood” on a whim, and the very first hit had looked like destiny: the attic room of a huge, Victorian-era house set on a steep hillside in the city’s historic Presidential District, a long-term restoration project taken on by its owners, a young couple named Dustin and Laura Floyd.
Speaker1	They were preparing to run their home as an inn.
Speaker1	I liked the premise of Airbnb, but since I was a bit anxious about the reality of sleeping in the home of strangers, I looked them up on Google before our trip.
Speaker1	The website of TDG Communications, a Deadwood marketing firm, listed Dustin as its co-owner and Laura as an administrator.
Speaker1	Looking at their silly photos, biographies, and job titles—“benevolent overlord,” “administrative goddess”—I figured they were probably safe.
Speaker1	With the nose pointed down the steep incline, I threw my car into park and stepped out into the brisk afternoon, Grace following a second later.
Speaker1	We opened the back end and stared past our visible breath for a beat: every inch of space had been filled with backpacks full of clothes, coats, boots, the comforter I’d slept with since sixth grade, Grace-approved foods like chips, bagels, and English muffins, and two hefty boxes full of books.
Speaker1	Our heads snapped up as a petite young woman—just a few years older than me, I guessed, early thirties—suddenly appeared on the broad porch, descending the front steps with a warm “Hell-o!
Speaker1	You must be Megan and Grace!
Speaker1	I’m Laura, I’ll show you to your room!” She stepped carefully over the curbside mound of packed snow, paused at the overflowing trunk—“Does all this come inside?”—and grabbed the nearest box to lead the way to the attic.
Speaker1	The three of us maneuvered the contents of my vehicle through the cramped mudroom, past a small room with wood floors, up two flights of stairs that creaked with every step, and into the room I’d seen in the Airbnb photos: L-shaped with scuffed hardwood floors, two large windows overlooking the neighborhood, and steep rooflines that made constant vigilance essential: though twelve feet high at its center, the ceiling sloped precipitously downward until it was just four feet at the room’s edges.
Speaker1	Laura gave us a few pointers about the town, told us which way to go if we cared to wander around, and then left us to head back to the office.
Speaker1	Grace and I stood in the attic in the midst of all the boxes, silent for a moment, assessing the space, planning.
Speaker1	We spent the next couple of hours rearranging the room.
Speaker1	We slid the queen-sized bed into the southeast corner, under the lowest part of the ceiling.
Speaker1	Beneath the low slope on the west side, the boxes of books and empty suitcases.
Speaker1	Clothes in the bureau.
Speaker1	Dresses and cardigans on the little rack around the corner, next to a beige-colored door labeled—inexplicably and in sloppy blue marker across the top of the door—JANE’S ATTIC.
Speaker1	We speculated as to who this Jane might be—a ghostly old woman haunting the gold miner she widowed?
Speaker1	A young woman fleeing an arranged marriage?—while we organized our books and filled the recently remodeled bathroom with bottles of shampoo and conditioner and the rest of our toiletries.
Speaker1	Finally, I spread my old comforter over the bed, and we sat down on top of it.
Speaker1	“What now?” Gracie asked.
Speaker1	I looked around.
Speaker1	There was still a bit more to unpack, but we’d been at it for two hours already.
Speaker1	“Well—” I started.
Speaker1	“Let’s go explore!”
Speaker1	Snow was just beginning to fall in thick flurries as we made our way down the hill in the darkness, but once we left the residential section and neared Deadwood’s Main Street, the lights seemed almost as bright as daytime.
Speaker1	SILVERADO screamed the sign in front of the first casino we came to, row after row of slot machines visible through the front windows.
Speaker1	We turned north onto Lower Main to find what looked to have been a thriving downtown at some point—casinos, restaurants, hotels, boutique clothing stores, and souvenir shops—each trying to look as if they still belonged in the Old West.
Speaker1	But like the brick road they lined, each appeared to be nearly deserted.
Speaker1	Many of the souvenir shops were already closed, but we stared through their windows anyway.
Speaker1	It still felt almost criminal to simply wander around with no rules.
Speaker1	We could take as much time as we wanted.
Speaker1	We could go anywhere we liked.
Speaker1	And we needed absolutely no reason at all.
Speaker1	The freedom was heady.
Speaker1	We kept going, past Pam’s Purple Door, past the Bullock Hotel, Belle Joli winery, Tin Lizzie’s, and the Gem Saloon.
Speaker1	We admired the decorative streetlamps wrapped in snow-dusted garlands that lined both sides of the street, and followed their alternating red and green bulbs all the way to the end of the road: the Four Aces.
Speaker1	The entrance opened directly onto a brightly lit gaming floor, with the musical noise of slot machines and tables for blackjack and three-card poker.
Speaker1	Aside from a large man slumped in front of a slot machine in the next room, the only people visible were casino employees: a couple of dealers, the bartender, and a maintenance worker.
Speaker1	One of the dealers gave me an inordinately long stare, but I averted my gaze and continued on.
Speaker1	Grace and I pulled up chairs at the bar and sat down.
Speaker1	It was my first time at a bar—Grace had gone with friends a couple of times back in Kansas—but I tried to play it cool and pretend I wasn’t freaked out by the whole experience.
Speaker1	On the other side of the counter, a pretty, thirty-something blonde in a short black skirt, a revealing white button-up, and plenty of eyeliner turned around and gave us a maternal smile.
Speaker1	She’d have to check our IDs.
Speaker1	I told her that Grace wasn’t twenty-one and I wasn’t drinking, so there was no need.
Speaker1	She looked puzzled but smiled and offered us hot chocolate.
Speaker1	We sipped it through tiny red and white straws and chatted with her.
Speaker1	“Cora,” she said, extending a hand.
Speaker1	“So … what are you girls doing here?”
Speaker1	We explained, giving the least amount of information possible: that we were visiting town for a month, between Grace’s fall and spring semesters.
Speaker1	That we didn’t really know anything about the area.
Speaker1	And that we had come to read books.
Speaker1	Cora’s smile was broad.
Speaker1	“Books!” She laughed.
Speaker1	She seemed to think we were hilarious, and her voice had a gentle warmth that made me like her immediately.
Speaker1	I forgot to be guarded.
Speaker1	It started off innocently enough: Why Deadwood?
Speaker1	I told Cora that our eldest brother was a fan of the show on HBO.
Speaker1	“Your eldest brother?” she wondered.
Speaker1	“How many siblings do you have?”
Speaker1	“There are eleven of us total,” I answered automatically.
Speaker1	“Eleven!
Speaker1	Your family must be religious.”
Speaker1	“Baptist,” I said.
Speaker1	“What kind of Baptist?”
Speaker1	My eyes widened.
Speaker1	How had we gotten here so fast?
Speaker1	“Independent,” I dodged.
Speaker1	She nodded sagely.
Speaker1	Maybe it was my tone or my expression, or maybe Grace and I were unwittingly giving off a “runaways” vibe, but Cora seemed to intuit that our family’s religion and our presence in Deadwood were not entirely unrelated.
Speaker1	She began to tell us about her mother, a woman who had created a religion of her own by cobbling together elements of Judaism and fringe Christian denominations.
Speaker1	“My mother was very ‘book smart,’ and she read a lot about a lot of different religions.
Speaker1	She was very strict.
Speaker1	She thought she knew better than everybody else.
Speaker1	The whole world was wrong, but she had figured it all out.
Speaker1	Very strict, very controlling.”
Speaker1	“What do you mean by ‘strict’?” I asked.
Speaker1	Cora described several prohibitions her mother had imposed, including a ban on the celebration of birthdays, Christmas, and other holidays.
Speaker1	“If anything bad happened to me,” she said, “it was because I was a sinner.
Speaker1	It was because I deserved it.
Speaker1	Instead of showing compassion or understanding or trying to help—you know, being a parent—my mother said things like that.”
Speaker1	I was dumbfounded.
Speaker1	Westboro and this woman’s mother clearly did not draw from all the same wells, but their attitudes sounded remarkably similar: an unwavering certainty in their righteousness and a categorical disdain for any ideas that did not fit with their own.
Speaker1	Although it saddened me to hear, I also felt a surge of recognition that made me oddly hopeful.
Speaker1	Maybe it wasn’t just us.
Speaker1	For so long, I had seen Westboro as an anomaly, unique among all the world.
Speaker1	I feared no one would understand what that life was like, and it made me feel alone—cast out of our family and forever set apart from the world for all the years we had spent antagonizing others.
Speaker1	Hiding from the past seemed like the only answer, and it was another reason we had come to this sleepy tourist town in the frozen Hills.
Speaker1	Grace and I looked at each other, and I knew we were thinking the same thing.
Speaker1	We turned back to Cora and told her everything.
Speaker1	“Next time,” she promised at the end of the night, “I’ll add a shot of Jack Daniels to your hot chocolate.”
Speaker1	It was nearing eleven the following morning by the time I finally awoke from a dead sleep.
Speaker1	I opened my eyes and waited for them to adjust to the cold light pouring in from the windows just next to the head of the bed.
Speaker1	I knew without looking that Grace was still asleep, her breath slow and even.
Speaker1	Even under the blankets, I was shivering.
Speaker1	I slowly sat up and scratched my sister’s head.
Speaker1	“Gracie?” I whispered.
Speaker1	“Emph!” she grunted in protest, pulling the blankets up to her ears.
Speaker1	I persisted.
Speaker1	“Shall I go make us breakfast?
Speaker1	Half a muffin and coffee?” We still weren’t eating much.
Speaker1	There was another petulant grunt from beneath the blanket, but Grace opened her eyes and we bargained: I would go on a mission to find the kitchen and return with breakfast, while she did some more unpacking.
Speaker1	I picked up a bag of English muffins and a can of Folgers instant coffee and headed downstairs.
Speaker1	The kitchen seemed improbably small after the historic grandeur of the other rooms on the first floor—broad spaces with high ceilings, beautiful hardwood floors, and brilliant sunlight streaming in through huge windows that spanned most of the distance from floor to ceiling.
Speaker1	When breakfast was ready, I returned to the attic and Grace and I got down to the main purpose of our trip: reading.
Speaker1	Back at the beginning of my communication with C.G.—Chad, I chided myself—he had introduced me to the writer David Foster Wallace.
Speaker1	I’d begun exploring Wallace’s words in whatever forms I could find them—short stories, essays, interviews—and had shared them with Grace.
Speaker1	We were particularly enthralled with a scene from one interview, in which Wallace recalled taking a year off from college to drive a school bus.
Speaker1	He was unhappy, and there was much he wanted to read that wouldn’t be assigned in his classes.
Speaker1	“And I read,” Wallace said; “pretty much everything I’ve read was read during that year.” Grace reminded me of the line in the weeks after we left Westboro, and it became an inspiration for our trip.
Speaker1	I couldn’t think of a more suitable use of our newfound freedom: trying to see the world from the perspectives of others.
Speaker1	Following Wallace’s example sounded like a grand adventure—an indulgence that would never have been countenanced at Westboro—but more than anything, it seemed like it might help Grace and me find some answers.
Speaker1	We would only have one month before she’d have to return to school in Kansas for the spring semester, but it was better than nothing.
Speaker1	In preparation for our reading trip, Grace and I had gathered stacks of books from a few friends, and had also paid a visit to the Lawrence Public Library.
Speaker1	While she had wandered off to the fiction section looking for Flannery O’Connor and J. D. Salinger, I’d asked a middle-aged librarian where I might find books on philosophy and religion.
Speaker1	I had run my fingers along their spines for a few minutes, reading titles and noting authors: David Hume, Immanuel Kant, C. S. Lewis, Friedrich Nietzsche.
Speaker1	After a moment, I’d found myself stepping back and staring up at the stacks, centuries’ worth of human thought devoted to understanding God and the world and how to live in it.
Speaker1	I had wondered how we at Westboro could have ever believed that we alone had discovered the one true answer to it all.
Speaker1	I had flushed with embarrassment at our arrogance, and at my own ignorance.
Speaker1	What did I know of these philosophers and their ideas?
Speaker1	Beware lest any man spoil you through philosophy and vain deceit, after the traditions of men, after the rudiments of the world, and not after Christ.
Speaker1	It was a catchall verse that had kept me from ever venturing too far off the beaten path, allowing me to dismiss out of hand any challenges to the most fundamental premises of our beliefs: Did God exist?
Speaker1	And was the Bible His infallible Word?
Speaker1	I had been taught that these were the questions of fools, but now I felt foolish for all the years I had failed to ask them.
Speaker1	I knew that I would read the Bible on this trip, but at Newbery’s suggestion, I had also brought along books by Christopher Hitchens, Sam Harris, and Richard Dawkins: God Is Not Great, The End of Faith, and The God Delusion.
Speaker1	Their presence felt illicit, so I decided to ease into the journey with a short book by Hemingway, whom I had also never read.
Speaker1	Lying prone on the hardwood floor with my elbows propped up on a pillow, I picked up Newbery’s copy of The Old Man and the Sea and began.
Speaker1	My phone sat nearby, ready and waiting for me to record any lines I found particularly moving.
Speaker1	I needed wisdom and direction, and I intended to cull as much of it as I could from as many places as I could find it.
Speaker1	Dec. 18, 2012—Day 1
Speaker1	THE OLD MAN & THE SEA
Speaker1	Now is no time to think of what you do not have.
Speaker1	Think of what you can do with what there is.
Speaker1	Despite our best intentions to read uninterrupted for hours on end, Grace and I didn’t make it too long before we decided it was time for lunch.
Speaker1	Grace sat at the kitchen table and read Anna Karenina aloud to me as I assembled peanut butter sandwiches, and then continued as I cleaned up the kitchen after lunch—washing pans, loading and unloading the dishwasher, sweeping the floor.
Speaker1	Most of the mess didn’t belong to us, but compared to the nightly hurricane that constituted dinner in the Phelps-Roper home, this was nothing.
Speaker1	And in any case, I was always happiest being useful.
Speaker1	A door slammed and we both froze, my eyes snapping up to Grace’s.
Speaker1	I peeked out the kitchen threshold, past the dining room and the entryway, and saw Laura coming through the front door, followed closely by a tall man with dark sideburns looking smart in a black peacoat and thick-rimmed glasses.
Speaker1	Damn, I thought.
Speaker1	Too late to hide now.
Speaker1	I tiptoed back to the sink.
Speaker1	“I’ve never seen the kitchen so clean!” the man said.
Speaker1	“I’m Dustin.
Speaker1	You must be…” His finger wavered back and forth between my sister and me.
Speaker1	“Megan?” he asked, pointing at me.
Speaker1	“And Grace?”
Speaker1	I grabbed a towel to dry my hands and then shook his.
Speaker1	He explained that since the offices for TDG, the marketing firm I’d read about, were just down the hill and around the corner, he and Laura often made the ten-minute walk home for lunch.
Speaker1	I looked at the clock and made a mental note to stay away from the first floor during any hour that could plausibly be considered lunchtime.
Speaker1	With three people now milling about, the kitchen had become uncomfortably full, so I stepped out of the main area and sat down with Grace at the table.
Speaker1	I watched the couple as they raided the refrigerator for leftover pizza and some sort of rice dish, surreptitiously studying them for signs of latent psychopathy.
Speaker1	“So what are you guys up to today?
Speaker1	Is there anything specific you’re interested in doing while you’re here?” Dustin’s tone was friendly and helpful, and I sensed that he was in the habit of acting as tour guide.
Speaker1	“Is there anything you’d recommend?” I asked.
Speaker1	He rattled off a list of local attractions, most of which I didn’t recognize, but he noted that this time of year, many of Deadwood’s historic locations were either closed or only functioning on a limited basis.
Speaker1	“And then there’s hiking,” he continued.
Speaker1	“Just up the hill is Mount Moriah Cemetery, where famous Deadwood locals are buried—Wild Bill Hickok, Calamity Jane, and Seth Bullock.”
Speaker1	Fifteen minutes later, Grace and I were dressed and out the door.
Speaker1	The cemetery gates were only about three blocks up the hill, but we were huffing and puffing almost as soon as we set out.
Speaker1	The incline was steep, the temperature was below freezing, and the air up here—nearly a mile above sea level—was far thinner than we were accustomed to.
Speaker1	We trekked along a paved path through the cemetery for a time, but layers of snow and ice made it difficult to follow.
Speaker1	I looked over my shoulder at the falling sun.
Speaker1	“We’re not gonna make it if we keep trying to follow the road,” I warned Grace.
Speaker1	There were no more gravestones here, so she shrugged and began sidestepping directly up the mountain.
Speaker1	Navigating straight up through the trees and around the iciest patches as best we could, we arrived at the top in less than twenty minutes.
Speaker1	To the west was a view of pine forests in Deadwood Gulch, and to the east, a vast expanse of the Black Hills with their rounded summits, some covered in snow and others dotted with the standing remains of dead trees.
Speaker1	The wind was ferocious.
Speaker1	We only had a few minutes before we had to head back—I was convinced we needed a cushion of daylight in case one of us broke several bones tumbling over the rocky edge or down the steep slope—but I sat down on a frozen concrete beam to take in the view anyway.
Speaker1	Grace sat across from me and slipped her phone out of her coat pocket.
Speaker1	“The Snail and the Rosebush,” she began, “by Hans Christian Andersen.”
Speaker1	It was a short tale, maybe half a dozen minutes long, but the wind was whipping away my tears by the end.
Speaker1	“But shouldn’t all of us on earth give the best we have to others and offer whatever is in our power?” the Rosebush asked the Snail.
Speaker1	“What do I have to do with the world?” the Snail derided.
Speaker1	“I spit at the world.
Speaker1	It’s no good!
Speaker1	The world means nothing to me.” My mind called forth images of our most contentious protests, surrounded by scores of counter-protesters who were screaming, chanting, only held back by lines of officers and police barricades.
Speaker1	I remembered our intent in those moments, the insistent need to show ourselves unbowed by “these God-haters,” our willingness to wound, our desire to cut them down in their arrogance—even when they were preparing to bury their closest loved ones.
Speaker1	Which of those people wouldn’t love to hurt me now?
Speaker1	An admission of guilt would be blood in the water.
Speaker1	They would eat me alive.
Speaker1	It was clear that the Snail’s path was the only option now: “I retire within myself, and there I shall stay.”
Speaker1	My sister came to sit next to me, and we linked arms and wept.
Speaker1	“I don’t want to be a snail!” I cried into her shoulder.
Speaker1	We could never be more than an object of scorn to the world.
Speaker1	What did we have to offer anyone?
Speaker1	Our lives were forever tainted and would never amount to anything so good and pure as the Rosebush.
Speaker1	“The sun was warm and the air so refreshing.
Speaker1	I drank of the clear dew and the strong rain.
Speaker1	I breathed.
Speaker1	I lived.
Speaker1	A power rose in me from out of the earth; a strength came down from up above; I felt an increasing happiness, always new, always great, so I had to blossom over and over again.
Speaker1	That was my life; I couldn’t do anything else.”
Speaker1	It was just too late for us.
Speaker1	We stood and started back, arriving at the inn at sunset again.
Speaker1	Twenty-four hours.
Speaker1	Dec. 19, 2012—Day 2
Speaker1	THE SUN ALSO RISES
Speaker1	You can’t get away from yourself by moving from one place to another.
Speaker1	It was only our second full day up here, but we’d already slipped into the pattern that would define our trip: Sleep late.
Speaker1	Eat breakfast.
Speaker1	Read.
Speaker1	Eat lunch.
Speaker1	Read.
Speaker1	Use the late afternoon to explore the Black Hills.
Speaker1	Eat dinner.
Speaker1	And then read until it was time to sleep again.
Speaker1	Tonight we would do our evening reading at the Four Aces, to keep Cora company on her next shift.
Speaker1	I already felt like a regular, and the employees greeted me like one.
Speaker1	Cora put mugs of hot chocolate in front of Grace and me, and introduced us to a couple of the dealers working that night, Ryan and Derek.
Speaker1	I recognized Ryan as the one who’d stared too long when I came in the last time—and soon discovered that it was because he had recognized me.
Speaker1	An amateur filmmaker and fan of the director Kevin Smith, Ryan had followed my years-long Twitter battle with Smith (#SaveMegan).
Speaker1	With eyes wide and mouth agape, I shook my head.
Speaker1	How was this possible?
Speaker1	I’d traveled twelve hours to this tiny town at the edge of South Dakota to get away from everything and everyone who knew me—only to be spotted on the first night at the first establishment I’d wandered into.
Speaker1	What were the odds?
Speaker1	“I need a drink,” I told Cora, using a poor imitation of a wink to disguise how unsettled Ryan’s revelation had made me.
Speaker1	She poured a shot of Jack Daniels’ Tennessee Honey into my hot chocolate, which I nearly spewed out the instant it touched my tongue.
Speaker1	Disgusting.
Speaker1	Not wanting to be rude, I sipped the rest of it slowly while we all conversed—and though the flavor didn’t improve, I felt my stomach grow warm and my worries fade.
Speaker1	As the dealers rotated through their stations and then off the gaming floor, they’d come to the bar to chat.
Speaker1	Grace and I would ask them questions about their families and their lives—so foreign to us—and they’d ask about Westboro, what it was like to picket in the face of angry crowds, how our peers at school had treated us.
Speaker1	They got a real kick out of the fact that we had made a habit of protesting outside our own high school over our lunch hour, snacking on Lunchables while classmates drove by honking their horns, flipping us off, and throwing the occasional sandwich.
Speaker1	“Do you have any family outside of the church?” Cora asked.
Speaker1	I beamed and told them the happiest moment I’d had since leaving.
Speaker1	Two nights after our departure from Westboro, Libby had driven Grace and me to our brother Josh’s house.
Speaker1	It had been eight years since he left—several lifetimes, it seemed—and at my request, Libby hadn’t alerted him to the fact that Grace and I had left, too.
Speaker1	My stomach was in knots during the forty-five-minute drive.
Speaker1	I had a terrible feeling that he would be unrecognizable to me, and that I would be to him.
Speaker1	I kept thinking of the terrible things I’d said about him when asked by journalists.
Speaker1	I’d told them he was a disobedient rebel.
Speaker1	I’d told them he was bound for Hell.
Speaker1	I’d told them he wasn’t my brother anymore.
Speaker1	For whosoever shall do the will of my Father which is in heaven, the same is my brother, and sister, and mother.
Speaker1	I suddenly felt so silly and arrogant for judging him all these years, based only on his behavior as a nineteen-year-old kid and the fact that he wasn’t a member of Westboro.
Speaker1	Would he forgive me?
Speaker1	What kind of person had he become since I’d known him?
Speaker1	It was pitch-dark when we arrived, nearly 9 P.M. Libby found the keypad and entered the code to open the garage door, and I followed her in while Grace stayed outside, waiting to see how Josh would react.
Speaker1	All the inside lights were on, and I only needed a glance and a moment to take it all in: the granite countertops and matching kitchen appliances, the hardwood floors, high ceilings, and the inviting scent of maple-vanilla candles.
Speaker1	This was the home of someone who’d made something of himself.
Speaker1	Libby pointed me down the steps just inside the door, and I proceeded alone, pausing at the bottom of the stairs to look around.
Speaker1	It was classic Josh.
Speaker1	To my right, a framed collection of theater ticket stubs.
Speaker1	Still the movie buff.
Speaker1	Above the basement door, a wooden plaque that read, “I’m ashamed of what I did for a Klondike Bar.” The same sort of saying that had characterized his entire T-shirt collection in high school.
Speaker1	And there in front of me was Josh himself, playing a video game with a headset on, his back to me—exactly the same position in which I’d found him so many times in his basement bedroom back at home.
Speaker1	Some things never change.
Speaker1	I held my breath, crossed the room, and sat down on the couch adjacent to the one he was occupying.
Speaker1	His head turned, and he froze.
Speaker1	Silence.
Speaker1	I studied his face for a beat, looking for signs of anger or rejection and finding only incomprehension.
Speaker1	I saw that where he had always been slim before, he was thick and muscled now.
Speaker1	He had less hair, but his face was the same—the male version of mine.
Speaker1	My head started to spin, and I finally exhaled.
Speaker1	In my hands was an envelope full of photos—of our parents and our siblings through all the years Josh had missed.
Speaker1	I pulled them out and started to babble, not knowing what to expect.
Speaker1	“Hi!” I squeaked nervously.
Speaker1	“I brought these for you.
Speaker1	This is Jonah, and this is Gabe, and Noah … Luke.
Speaker1	Grace took this one of Mom and Dad when we were hiking, and…”
Speaker1	He sat still, unmoving, and I rambled on.
Speaker1	Finally, he interrupted: “Hold on a second!” He stood up, took the photos from my hands, set them on the couch, and motioned for me to stand.
Speaker1	His embrace had all the intensity of my final ones with Bekah and Mom and Dad, and though this one was “hello” instead of “goodbye,” I couldn’t stop the tears from spilling over again.
Speaker1	Grace walked in the basement door a minute later.
Speaker1	Josh stepped back from me.
Speaker1	“What are you doing here?” He sounded truly bewildered.
Speaker1	As if he thought it might be a dream.
Speaker1	We stayed up talking until the wee hours of the morning, and if it weren’t for the sweeping changes in Josh’s life, it would have seemed like we’d never been apart at all.
Speaker1	Josh was married now and had a little boy.
Speaker1	He’d finished college and gotten a master’s degree.
Speaker1	He had a great job.
Speaker1	He had just bought this house.
Speaker1	Motivated, industrious, and hardworking, just like our parents.
Speaker1	I was elated for my brother and proud of what he had accomplished without the vast support system we’d grown up with—but I couldn’t help feeling very small next to him.
Speaker1	There were only seventeen months between our births, and at twenty-eight, he’d already managed to build a wonderful life.
Speaker1	I felt a pang of envy and regret that he and Grace had both chosen to leave Westboro so much earlier in their lives.
Speaker1	Their decisions had left them more years to live in a world outside of Westboro’s conjuring—years I had wasted hurting people in a misguided effort to serve an image of a God that seemed less real all the time.
Speaker1	But I got more years with our family, I reminded myself before bitterness could root itself too deeply.
Speaker1	Eight more years of morning coffee with our mother.
Speaker1	Of sharing jokes and indie rock music with our dad.
Speaker1	Of pulling Noah and Luke around the neighborhood in the little green wagon while they slept.
Speaker1	Of French-braiding Bekah’s shimmery auburn hair while she read aloud to me.
Speaker1	I called forth memories to steel myself against twin but opposing tendencies I felt warring inside me: between regretting the past and romanticizing it.
Speaker1	I couldn’t allow bitterness to steal the beauty in my family, or love to conceal the destructiveness in it.
Speaker1	I wouldn’t rewrite history.
Speaker1	I would hold the whole messy truth of it to myself all at once.
Speaker1	I wouldn’t do to them what we had done to Josh.
Speaker1	“We have more family, actually,” I told Cora.
Speaker1	“Like my grandparents.
Speaker1	We haven’t spoken to them yet.”
Speaker1	“Why not?” she wondered.
Speaker1	I paused.
Speaker1	Growing up, I’d hardly known my dad’s parents.
Speaker1	Since neither had ever been part of our church community, we didn’t see them except for rare visits.
Speaker1	My mother had always spoken derisively of them, and I understood from a young age that they were not like us.
Speaker1	Nana and Grandpa had married young, and divorced amicably when my father was a baby—a cardinal sin in Westboro’s estimation, especially because they had both remarried.
Speaker1	Still, their occasional stops had been grudgingly allowed until a few years earlier, not long after Grandpa’s final visit.
Speaker1	He had stopped by unannounced one summer day, and my mother had used the opportunity to instigate a fight with him: she asked him what he thought of our protests at soldiers’ funerals.
Speaker1	Grandpa was a career military man, serving in the U.S. Air Force until he retired, so when my mother asked, he told her exactly what he thought of the protests.
Speaker1	Seeing the contentious discussion, my nine-year-old brother Noah wandered over: “Who is this guy?
Speaker1	!” he demanded.
Speaker1	Grandpa had left a few minutes later, and I hadn’t spoken to him since.
Speaker1	My parents wrote letters to Nana and Grandpa enumerating my grandparents’ sins, insisting they wouldn’t expose us children to such corrupting influences, and that had been the end of it.
Speaker1	“I don’t know exactly,” I told Cora.
Speaker1	“I just have this … bad feeling.” She nodded, but she clearly didn’t understand.
Speaker1	The truth was that I didn’t understand, either, and the fact that I lacked a good answer—a sound explanation for this “bad feeling”—bothered me.
Speaker1	My grandmother had shown me nothing but kindness, but I couldn’t seem to stop judging her according to the church’s rubric.
Speaker1	I had already crossed the lines between “Us” and “Them” several times—for Josh, Newbery, Chad, Libby, even Cora and Ryan here in the casino—but somehow, those lines remained firmly in place.
Speaker1	It was an obvious point, but it suddenly struck me that this Us/Them mindset was deeply ingrained and resistant to change.
Speaker1	Unless I wanted to be forever ruled by a nebulous fear of outsiders, it wasn’t enough for me just to cross that line a few times; I needed to decide whether the line should be moved, or changed, or erased entirely.
Speaker1	It couldn’t be a simple matter of a blanket rejection of my former beliefs, either, which would be no less silly and irrational than unquestioning acceptance of them.
Speaker1	Instead, I would need to look at the evidence.
Speaker1	I’d need to carefully examine each of these thought patterns, holdovers from Westboro that would have to be challenged and reconsidered—over and over again—if there was any hope for lasting change.
Speaker1	Prove all things; hold fast that which is good.
Speaker1	I thought about the last time we’d heard from Nana—a birthday card she’d sent to Grace back in October.
Speaker1	I had felt so sad for her, ignored by our family for years on end.
Speaker1	Happy birthday, Grace, she’d written.
Speaker1	I’ll bet you are growing up beautiful.
Speaker1	Wish I could hear from someone.
Speaker1	I love you.
Speaker1	As little as I’d seen Nana, she hadn’t missed sending us birthday cards in all my years.
Speaker1	Like my mother, I had seen her efforts as a pitiful substitute for having a real presence in our lives, but now the gesture seemed like determined persistence—an effort to maintain an open door despite my parents’ attempts to seal all doors shut.
Speaker1	Nana had been trying to show that she loved us, even though she couldn’t be around us.
Speaker1	“I think I want to call Nana now,” I said to Grace.
Speaker1	She nodded.
Speaker1	What was there to stop me from picking up the phone that instant?
Speaker1	I got her phone number from Josh and began to pace an empty room filled with slot machines, tuning out their jingles as the phone began to ring.
Speaker1	“Hello?”
Speaker1	“Hi, Nana … this is Megan.”
Speaker1	“Hello!” she said.
Speaker1	“Megan who?”
Speaker1	I winced.
Speaker1	The moment I clarified that I was her granddaughter, Nana started to cry—and all the harder when I explained that Grace had left, too.
Speaker1	“I have been waiting for you grandchildren for years,” she said.
Speaker1	“Decades.
Speaker1	Megan.
Speaker1	I never thought it would be you.”
Speaker1	“I didn’t, either,” I told her truthfully.
Speaker1	Listening to my grandmother describe her years of struggle and sadness, I began to see the lasting effects of Westboro’s treatment of outsiders.
Speaker1	Nana’s pain didn’t come from a one-time decision to keep her at arm’s length and out of our lives, but from a continuing and active rejection—from watching the years of her life tick by without the love of her family.
Speaker1	Nana had been living this nightmare for more than thirty years.
Speaker1	The pain was ongoing.
Speaker1	I wondered how I would ever bear it.
Speaker1	Dec. 20, 2012—Day 3
Speaker1	THE SUN ALSO RISES
Speaker1	Wonderful how one loses track of the days up here in the mountains.
Speaker1	Time slowed to a crawl in Deadwood.
Speaker1	The hours stretched out endlessly before me, and on the good days, I couldn’t get enough.
Speaker1	After year upon year of constant churning and contention, I began to relish the quiet.
Speaker1	I would take the day’s reading to the fluffy green couch by the huge window in the living room—a single pane, so it was a view unbroken—but I’d often end up spending more time staring out the window than at the page, watching the snow blanket my car and the neighborhood and the pine forests farther up the hill.
Speaker1	When Grace was ready for chocolate or an adventure, I would happily indulge.
Speaker1	I loved seeing where her whims would take us.
Speaker1	Donning thrift store wedding dresses for an impromptu photo shoot at Deadwood Dick’s Antiques.
Speaker1	Watching students put the finishing touches on the life-sized log cabin they were building in shop class during a drop-in tour of the local high school.
Speaker1	Wading through knee-high drifts of immaculate snow along a creek in Spearfish Canyon, where the echoing snarls of a pack of dogs—another possible instrument of God’s wrath?—suddenly broke the silence and sent us hightailing it back to the car.
Speaker1	Taking care of my sister gave me purpose.
Speaker1	I knew I couldn’t give her what she truly wanted—the return of our beloved family—but after all we had lost, I wanted to offer consolation however I could.
Speaker1	“No!” Grace objected playfully one evening.
Speaker1	We’d been reading by lamplight in the attic, and she had just hauled her huge old, clunky, barely functioning typewriter across the room, setting it down eleven inches from my face.
Speaker1	After several minutes of poking and grumbling and paper-loading and reloading and random dings later, I moved toward the door to find a quieter space.
Speaker1	“You can’t leave me!
Speaker1	You’ll be reading to the sound of my typewriter!
Speaker1	It will be so poetic.
Speaker1	In Deadwood.”
Speaker1	“Everything is poetic in Deadwood,” I told her, laughing, but settled back down to read.
Speaker1	“I’m writing that down,” she declared.
Speaker1	She continued noisily pecking away for a few moments and then apologized.
Speaker1	“I want to write these thoughts as I have them,” she said by way of explanation.
Speaker1	I considered.
Speaker1	“I like to think about my thoughts before I have them.”
Speaker1	She laughed again.
Speaker1	“I’m writing that down, too!” Her delight was contagious.
Speaker1	But it wasn’t enough.
Speaker1	The bad days—the ones where Grace would refuse to speak to me, behaving as though she didn’t see me, couldn’t hear me—began to multiply.
Speaker1	The smallest of disagreements could grow into a days-long episode of the silent treatment, and I struggled to understand why my sister was so upset with me.
Speaker1	If I didn’t immediately get on board with her ideas—like the indefinite trip to France—she would insist that I was impossibly selfish and didn’t care about her.
Speaker1	If I offered an explanation for my disagreements, then I was simply “justifying myself” and not listening to her.
Speaker1	And then there was Chad.
Speaker1	He had reappeared a few days before I left Westboro, and we’d been in touch ever so cautiously—and only via text message—ever since.
Speaker1	He explained his sudden and protracted absence in a way that both relieved my hurt and made my heart ache: he’d been fevered and immobile for weeks, after he’d managed to contract both mononucleosis and West Nile virus simultaneously.
Speaker1	He had almost died.
Speaker1	Our communication had been as tentative as ever, due in part to a new anxiety he harbored: that I might suddenly show up on his doorstep unannounced.
Speaker1	As unpracticed as I was in the art of “normal” relationships, I was under no illusions that such a move would be a good idea.
Speaker1	He telegraphed his reticence just as clearly as he had his care.
Speaker1	There was that small part of me that delighted in the idea of our being in the same state, but South Dakota was vast.
Speaker1	In Deadwood, I was nearly as far from Chad’s home as I had been back in Kansas.
Speaker1	And when I told him about our plans to run away and read books, I didn’t tell him where we were going.
Speaker1	I wasn’t going to make a fool of myself.
Speaker1	By the time I arrived in Deadwood, Chad and I were back to texting nearly every day, though still cautiously.
Speaker1	He was curious about what I was doing and thinking, wondering how I was adjusting to life on the outside.
Speaker1	His queries seemed like a test sometimes, and at the heart of each stood a single question: Did I really belong outside of Westboro’s fences?
Speaker1	When he finally asked me where we had chosen for our reading quest, I told him the truth with studied nonchalance.
Speaker1	“Enjoy Deadwood,” he answered.
Speaker1	“I’ll be out there sometime after Christmas.
Speaker1	I’ll try to look you up.
Speaker1	Until then.” My whole body hummed with excitement, but when Grace caught me grinning stupidly at my phone, she was angry.
Speaker1	She never had to ask when it was Chad I was messaging, and she seemed to have an uncanny ability to intuit when I was just thinking of him.
Speaker1	She didn’t like that I wanted to share so many things with him, and told me that his influence had bothered her for a long time.
Speaker1	“I can’t help but think he poisoned a part of you,” she wrote.
Speaker1	She suspected that he was the cause of my initial doubts.
Speaker1	Reading Grace’s message, I was overcome by a powerful sense of denial.
Speaker1	No, no, no.
Speaker1	We were never supposed to be influenced by outsiders, and that idea had been a constant refrain at Westboro since I was small.
Speaker1	“These people have nothing to offer us!” we would say, a sentiment often accompanied by a dismissive sneer.
Speaker1	God instructed us to stand fast and hold the line against evildoers.
Speaker1	Behold, I have made thy face strong against their faces, and thy forehead strong against their foreheads.
Speaker1	As an adamant harder than flint have I made thy forehead: fear them not, neither be dismayed at their looks, though they be a rebellious house.
Speaker1	I was revolted by the thought that I had let an outsider affect me.
Speaker1	It made me feel weak and vulnerable.
Speaker1	Corrupted.
Speaker1	I responded to Grace’s assertion with a slew of words about the church’s cruelty and doctrinal errors—but the more I tried to frame the words to insist that Chad’s arguments had not influenced me, the clearer it became that my sister was right, at least in part.
Speaker1	MEGAN: And Gracie—assuming for a second that he *did* poison a part of me, I can only see one possibility.
Speaker1	I can see one thing that I lost (though I believe this process started way before Chad).
Speaker1	If the thing he poisoned was my ability to go along with something even if I disagreed with it—if he killed my ability to ignore and turn away from my conscience—then I’m glad he poisoned it.
Speaker1	GRACE: I will never like him.
Speaker1	Although I tried to respond to my sister’s moods with gentleness and restraint, reason and logic, my efforts often failed spectacularly.
Speaker1	A tsunami of rage, pain, confusion, and despair would engulf us both as we exploded at each other, storming off to far-flung corners of the inn with venom coursing through us.
Speaker1	It was fast becoming clear that we had no idea how to navigate relationships outside the church’s black-and-white, all-or-nothing paradigm.
Speaker1	I’d thought that going through this process with a most beloved sister might make things easier—and it did, in some ways—but leaving together had also created a situation I hadn’t foreseen.
Speaker1	With two of us, the mental, emotional, and logistical struggles of starting life again, almost from scratch, were concentrated and compounded.
Speaker1	We had never learned how to “agree to disagree,” because to church members, such a concept was blasphemous.
Speaker1	Can two walk together, except they be agreed?
Speaker1	What communion hath light with darkness?
Speaker1	At Westboro, every decision had moral implications.
Speaker1	Every question had a single correct answer.
Speaker1	Miscommunication required blame, and mistakes required punishment.
Speaker1	My sister and I knew how to cajole, issue ultimatums, attribute ill motives, and assign moral failure to the other party in a dispute, but we couldn’t compromise and we couldn’t move forward without a resolution as to which of us was in the wrong.
Speaker1	Without an absolute authority who could resolve the problem and declare one side as just and righteous, we floundered.
Speaker1	“Are you … okay?”
Speaker1	Curled up on the couch in the parlor, I glanced up to see Laura’s tiny frame in the doorway, barely visible in the dwindling light coming in from the west window.
Speaker1	She and Dustin had been out of town for several days, visiting her family for Christmas, and her presence here on Christmas Eve surprised me.
Speaker1	Why are they home already?
Speaker1	I hadn’t even heard her come in.
Speaker1	I swiped at my swollen eyes and tried to reassure her that I was fine, but I choked on another sob instead.
Speaker1	She sat down and tentatively put an arm around my shoulder.
Speaker1	I briefly debated an attempt to preserve my dignity and walk away, but the last remains of my life were falling apart.
Speaker1	What did I have to lose?
Speaker1	“She won’t talk to me!” I wailed.
Speaker1	“I don’t know what to do!”
Speaker1	I wasn’t sure what I expected Laura to say.
Speaker1	I just knew that I couldn’t stand another second of this solitary confinement.
Speaker1	I needed my mother—but in her absence, I needed anyone.
Speaker1	Laura shushed me and rubbed comforting circles on my back while I calmed down.
Speaker1	“Do you want to have dinner with Dustin and me?” she asked.
Speaker1	I followed Laura into the kitchen, watching as she and Dustin maneuvered around the small space, chopping herbs and vegetables for some sort of soup.
Speaker1	I had assumed they found it burdensome to have two guests puttering around their house, but they both seemed perfectly at ease with an emotional stranger recovering from a crying jag at their kitchen table.
Speaker1	Dustin explained that they loved to travel and to meet new people, but since full-time jobs now made such excursions difficult, hosting guests was the best alternative.
Speaker1	Laura waxed eloquent describing their experiences studying abroad—she in Belgium and the Netherlands, he at Oxford—and it was obvious that she missed the freedom and adventure.
Speaker1	When I’d regained full possession of my composure, Laura tactfully probed the cause of my distress.
Speaker1	I was evasive, but explained that my sister’s lack of communication wasn’t really her fault.
Speaker1	That we had just moved out of our lifelong home, and that our family wasn’t speaking to us anymore.
Speaker1	“Can I ask why?” Laura said gently.
Speaker1	I paused.
Speaker1	Talking with Cora and Ryan at the bar was one thing, but Grace and I were living with these people.
Speaker1	What if I told the truth and their response was outrage and anger?
Speaker1	I knew such a response would be justified, but I didn’t want to risk it.
Speaker1	“We don’t agree with their religion,” I hedged.
Speaker1	They both nodded, and an inscrutable look passed between them.
Speaker1	As we loaded the dishwasher after dinner, Laura offered me another room—the old library on the first floor—to take some of the pressure off Grace and me.
Speaker1	“For free?” I blurted.
Speaker1	“Thank you!”
Speaker1	She laughed.
Speaker1	“No problem.
Speaker1	Goodnight, Megan.”
Speaker1	A split second before I stepped into the kitchen the following morning, I realized the date and felt a surge of panic.
Speaker1	What am I going to say when they say, “Merry Christmas”?
Speaker1	!
Speaker1	After all the years of picketing Christmas services, of singing our version of “Santa Claus Is Coming to Town” (“Santa Claus Will Take You to Hell”), of listening to my mother read to us of the holiday’s pagan roots, and of reciting from the book of Jeremiah to passersby—For the customs of the people are vain: for one cutteth a tree out of the forest, the work of the hands of the workman, with the axe.
Speaker1	They deck it with silver and with gold; they fasten it with nails and with hammers, that it move not … they are altogether brutish and foolish: the stock is a doctrine of vanities … After all these years, my abhorrence of Christmas was visceral, and the thought of trying to frame the words “Merry Christmas” made me physically ill.
Speaker1	I could ignore the shop clerks and Salvation Army bell ringers, of course, but I was a guest here.
Speaker1	“Good morning!” Dustin said brightly.
Speaker1	I’m sure my face projected “deer in headlights,” but he was standing at the counter working the contents of a mixing bowl.
Speaker1	“Waffles,” he explained.
Speaker1	“Laura will be down in a few minutes.” He wrinkled his nose and lowered his voice: “She’s not a morning person, but my waffles should do the trick.”
Speaker1	When Laura trudged in a minute later, there was no sign of the chipper, friendly host from the evening before.
Speaker1	She was still in pajamas, eyes half-closed, mouth half-open, and literally dragging her feet.
Speaker1	She pulled a chair from the table and dragged it to the open heat register that I’d discovered on my first morning here, so that the warm air blew up her pajama pants.
Speaker1	Her mannerisms and short stature put me in mind of a small child, and I couldn’t stop myself from laughing out loud.
Speaker1	Dustin joined me.
Speaker1	“Dustin makes the best waffles,” she moaned with a sigh.
Speaker1	“That’s the only reason I’m not in bed.”
Speaker1	“It’ll be an easy day, anyway,” Dustin assured her, and then to me: “We’re just gonna watch Lord of the Rings movies all day.
Speaker1	It’s an annual marathon.
Speaker1	You’re welcome to join us.”
Speaker1	Laura was right about the waffles—copious amounts of real butter were the key, Dustin confided—but before I joined the movie marathon, I decided to test the waters with Grace.
Speaker1	I returned to the attic to grab a change of clothes, my toothbrush, and a blanket, and though my sister was sitting in bed awake, she said nothing.
Speaker1	She didn’t look up, studiously staring down at her phone.
Speaker1	No rapprochement in sight.
Speaker1	I made my way back down to the living room, wrapped myself in the blanket—all three of us had the same idea; the house was freezing—and I settled in on the smaller couch.
Speaker1	Only the extended versions of the films would suffice for this pair of self-professed nerds, so The Fellowship of the Ring ran for nearly four hours.
Speaker1	We had to keep pausing the action so they could explain more about this world of elves, dwarfs, wizards, and hobbits, but they didn’t seem to mind.
Speaker1	As the credits began to roll, I remembered the holiday and looked around.
Speaker1	Not only had there been no “Merry Christmas,” there was no tree, no red and green lights, no decorations, nothing.
Speaker1	Curious.
Speaker1	When I asked why, Dustin told me that they were Jehovah’s Witnesses and thus didn’t observe holidays that weren’t sanctioned by the Bible.
Speaker1	That was why they had returned home on Christmas Eve: they’d been visiting Laura’s parents and couldn’t celebrate with them without running afoul of God and conscience.
Speaker1	My relief was palpable.
Speaker1	“Oh!” I said.
Speaker1	“We’ve never celebrated Christmas, either!”
Speaker1	“Really?” he asked.
Speaker1	“What religion is it again?”
Speaker1	“Baptist,” I said.
Speaker1	“Don’t Baptists celebrate Christmas?” Laura asked.
Speaker1	“Not … our church.”
Speaker1	Dustin’s brow furrowed, and they both nodded.
Speaker1	“Well,” he said, “should we pause for lunch?”
Speaker1	What I actually wanted was to spend the rest of the day firing questions at them.
Speaker1	What did they believe?
Speaker1	And why?
Speaker1	How had they chosen to become Jehovah’s Witnesses?
Speaker1	If they took instruction from the Bible, why had Laura’s beautiful dark curls been chopped?
Speaker1	What about the passage that clearly requires long hair for women and short hair for men?
Speaker1	Doth not even nature itself teach you, that, if a man have long hair, it is a shame unto him?
Speaker1	But if a woman have long hair, it is a glory to her: for her hair is given her for a covering.
Speaker1	I managed to suppress my curiosity at first, but as the day wore on and we became more at ease with each other, I couldn’t help bringing the conversation back to religion.
Speaker1	I tried to assume the role of objective observer, but I found it impossible to discuss the Floyds’ beliefs without contrasting them to my former tradition—and since Westboro’s beliefs and practices were so unusual and well-known, it didn’t take them long to guess which church I might be describing.
Speaker1	As with Cora and the dealers at the Four Aces, I was surprised again at how understanding of my past Dustin and Laura seemed to be.
Speaker1	Instead of anger or judgment, it was fast friendship that resulted from our opening up to one another.
Speaker1	For the next several days, we spent every spare moment we could find together, talking about belief during their lunch hour, chopping vegetables for dinner, and sitting around the living room afterward with Bibles and Web browsers at the ready.
Speaker1	When communications with Grace thawed again—always a mysterious but welcome process—she joined the discussion, as well.
Speaker1	It would have been easy to spend all our days talking about theology, but Laura suggested we take our conversation on the road so that we wouldn’t sit at the inn and miss the beauty of the Hills.
Speaker1	At Mount Rushmore National Memorial, Laura pointed out an old educational video featuring the fathers of both of our hosts—Dustin’s had been the first employee of the Mount Rushmore Society, and Laura’s had been the superintendent here for nearly two decades, later moving to Yellowstone National Park.
Speaker1	“I was born in Yellowstone when my dad was an employee there,” she said.
Speaker1	“He’s the superintendent now.
Speaker1	That’s where we went to visit my parents last week.”
Speaker1	Laura explained that her decision to become a Jehovah’s Witness in college had put a strain on her relationship with her parents and siblings.
Speaker1	She’d been raised Presbyterian and was inspired to convert by Dustin, a longtime friend and love interest who had grown up in the faith.
Speaker1	Like members of Westboro, Witnesses are instructed to date and marry only those who share their beliefs—but Laura hadn’t blindly converted for her future husband.
Speaker1	Instead, she had carefully studied with Witnesses for four years before deciding to seek baptism and membership in the organization.
Speaker1	Although her parents had responded in different ways, both were hurt by her decision.
Speaker1	Her father was stoic, but her mother’s pain manifested in occasional angry lamentations about the things Laura would be missing: participating in non-Witness religious ceremonies like weddings and baptisms, and celebrations of holidays and birthdays—important milestones in the life of their family.
Speaker1	Laura’s beliefs now spurned the traditions that brought her family together, and inherently judged non-Witnesses as wrongdoers.
Speaker1	“I became something ‘Outside’ in my family,” Laura told me later.
Speaker1	“Being present at family gatherings that centered around holidays felt like being a vegan at a meat feast.
Speaker1	No one can figure out exactly why this person is here, and are they really just going to stand over the meatballs and judge us?”
Speaker1	In the eyes of her family, Laura was behaving irrationally.
Speaker1	Canvassing neighborhoods to knock on the doors of strangers to explain to them the importance of joining an organization whose members were convinced that Armageddon was imminent and that Satan had been loosed upon the earth in October of 1914, running amok throughout the world ever since?
Speaker1	It made no sense.
Speaker1	This was not the life her parents had wanted for her.
Speaker1	Laura’s predicament sounded uncannily like my father’s, and I was surprised by how many similarities there were between the doctrines of Westboro and the Witnesses—but right then, staring out the window at the sixty-foot-high carvings of George Washington and company, what held my attention were the differences between the two groups.
Speaker1	In contrast to Westboro’s version of Hell—eternal torment, an idea that had become detestable to me—Witnesses believe that Hell is simply death.
Speaker1	When I quoted Bible verses that seemed to contradict this, Dustin and Laura brought forth other verses to support their position.
Speaker1	For the living know that they will die, but the dead know nothing at all … there is no work nor planning nor knowledge nor wisdom in the Grave, where you are going.
Speaker1	Their understanding of the verses I presented was fundamentally different from the one I had been raised with, and I was slack-jawed to realize that there was more than one way to read the text—that from one passage, multiple meanings could be deduced without contradicting the language in the original.
Speaker1	That interpretation was a phenomenon with real implications for believers.
Speaker1	At Westboro, we had denied that interpretation allowed for any disagreements on doctrines.
Speaker1	Knowing this first, that no prophecy of the scripture is of any private interpretation.
Speaker1	For any question or issue, there was a single correct understanding, and it was ours.
Speaker1	Legitimate disagreement with Westboro’s theology could not exist within this framework, and though I had come to reject some of the church’s precepts, I immediately fell back into that paradigm—that there was only one way—because I hadn’t yet seen another that made sense to me.
Speaker1	I was still assuming that anyone contradicting “the clear meaning of Scripture” was either deliberately mangling the truth or deluded by God into believing a lie.
Speaker1	And yet, here were two people whose kindness, intelligence, generosity, and good intentions were all self-evident.
Speaker1	They weren’t evil, stupid, or delusional.
Speaker1	They just saw things differently than I had been taught to, and they could articulate the logic and reasoning behind their thinking.
Speaker1	My head was spinning as the four of us fought the cold wind and made our way back to the Floyds’ car.
Speaker1	Grace and I looked across the backseat at each other, amazement on both of our faces, my thoughts reflected in her features: How was this possible?
Speaker1	If there truly was more than one legitimate way to understand the world, then there was nothing inherently wrong with people who believed differently than we did.
Speaker1	We could cease presuming most people were evil and ill-intentioned.
Speaker1	The hope that sprang from this realization would become the new foundation of my life, but along with that hope came still more confusion:
Speaker1	If there was more than one possible answer, how did anyone manage to decide between them?
Speaker1	Dec. 30, 2012—Day 13
Speaker1	THE GOD DELUSION
Speaker1	The journalist Andrew Mueller is of the opinion that pledging yourself to any particular religion “is no more or less weird than choosing to believe that the world is rhombus-shaped, and borne through the cosmos in the pincers of two enormous green lobsters called Esmerelda and Keith.”
Speaker1	CHAD: I can tell you that I already know you’ll talk too fast.
Speaker1	You did leave a pretty long YouTube fast-talking trail.
Speaker1	I did think the screen liked your face.
Speaker1	That’s a fact.
Speaker1	The shit you said was crazy.
Speaker1	You think I discount that because of the screen liking your face.
Speaker1	I don’t.
Speaker1	I need to know that it wasn’t necessarily you.
Speaker1	You know?
Speaker1	MEGAN: Where to begin?
Speaker1	CHAD: I don’t believe Obama is the literal antichrist.
Speaker1	I don’t believe gays marrying will trigger the end of days.
Speaker1	Etc.
Speaker1	etc.
Speaker1	MEGAN: I don’t believe either of those things, either.
Speaker1	I didn’t think there was even enough biblical evidence to support them.
Speaker1	Start with: I believed the Bible was It.
Speaker1	That it was right no matter what I would have come up with myself, even if I thought something it said was Wrong, even if it made me Angry, even if it hurt other people.
Speaker1	CHAD: Okay.
Speaker1	Not tonight.
Speaker1	And know that I think in spite of all of that, your family has so many great qualities … and obviously did such a great job of raising, educating you, etc.
Speaker1	Learning about the Floyds’ belief system was eye-opening to me.
Speaker1	In many ways, it seemed to be exactly what I had wanted from my family—an improvement on several of our most objectionable doctrines.
Speaker1	Where we had been deliberately provocative and even cruel, for instance, Witnesses strove for gentleness: in contrast to our boisterous funeral pickets, they knocked on doors to preach their gospel, meekly walking away when requested.
Speaker1	And yet, in spite of that fact, I still found myself unsatisfied.
Speaker1	My questions had become deeper since I left Topeka.
Speaker1	In all my conversations with Dustin and Laura, I had refrained from asking the question that now weighed so heavily on my mind: Why did they believe that the Bible was the capital-T Truth in the first place?
Speaker1	I wasn’t looking to be persuaded from the position I had held throughout my conscious life.
Speaker1	I had dearly loved the Scriptures from the time I was a child listening to my mother read from them each night, her reverence clear in every word.
Speaker1	When I quoted from the King James Version to journalists or curious passersby on the picket line, their eyes would often glaze over at the seventeenth-century prose—but the language and the imagery were as familiar and beautiful to me as my own mother’s voice, and comforting in their familiarity.
Speaker1	How sweet are thy words unto my taste!
Speaker1	yea, sweeter than honey to my mouth!
Speaker1	The Bible’s words became mine, and at all hours and in all circumstances, my mind would call them forth for guidance, courage, inspiration.
Speaker1	I read them, studied them, memorized them, recited them, and defended them daily.
Speaker1	Though I had turned away from it while we were still at Westboro, the question I had posed to Grace months earlier wouldn’t be denied any longer: “What if the God of the Bible isn’t the God of creation?
Speaker1	We don’t believe that the Koran has the truth about God.
Speaker1	Is it just because we were told forever that this is How Things Are?”
Speaker1	At home, my siblings and I had learned a principle: Even if God’s actions or instructions in the Bible seemed evil to our finite minds, all that He did was—by definition—perfect and just.
Speaker1	For my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways, saith the Lord.
Speaker1	For as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher than your ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts.
Speaker1	God’s Word was the standard by which all men were measured, and His actions were righteous simply by virtue of the fact that He had taken them.
Speaker1	All that was in the Bible was unquestionably Good.
Speaker1	For me, this belief was becoming more and more difficult to sustain.
Speaker1	Fortunately, the Bible’s truth and reliability was the subject of the first Sunday meeting I attended at Rapid City’s Kingdom Hall, as Jehovah’s Witnesses call their meeting places.
Speaker1	I hadn’t been inside a place of worship in nearly two months, and in all my years, I had been inside non-Westboro churches on only the rarest of occasions.
Speaker1	The foreignness of this place was both an intense curiosity and a physical revulsion, and I had to fight to suppress the latter.
Speaker1	The thoughts that kept me from bolting from the building were becoming something of a mantra: What am I feeling?
Speaker1	Why am I feeling it?
Speaker1	Are my feelings justified by evidence, or a matter of instinct?
Speaker1	Laura guided us to sit in the middle section of the hall, and I looked around, trying to collect myself by focusing on specific details.
Speaker1	The room had a capacity of about two hundred, though fewer than half the seats were filled.
Speaker1	Rows of upholstered chairs instead of pews.
Speaker1	Industrial beige carpet and a raised platform with a small lectern for the speaker.
Speaker1	“You” and “your” instead of “thee” and “thou” to address God.
Speaker1	During the prayer, husbands in suits wrapped their arms around wives in long skirts.
Speaker1	The women left their hair uncovered, giving me a sense of our collective nakedness among the congregation.
Speaker1	When I asked Laura later about the lack of head coverings, she directed me to the very same passage that Westboro used to require them—which, I was shocked to realize, was not in keeping with the plain language used there.
Speaker1	But every woman that prayeth or prophesieth with her head uncovered dishonoureth her head, the passage read, and then clarified that her hair is given her for a covering.
Speaker1	In spite of this language, Westboro required a second head covering—and took other churches’ refusal to do so as dispositive evidence that the whole congregation was rebellious and damned by God.
Speaker1	In Laura’s Bible, the text was even clearer: For her hair is given to her instead of a covering.
Speaker1	That Jehovah’s Witnesses used an entirely different version of the Scriptures—the New World Translation—brought up yet another layer of doubt.
Speaker1	I knew that translations of the Bible often varied widely in their language—and thus their meaning—but Westboro had declared the King James to be the only acceptable text.
Speaker1	All others were tainted by human hands and desires.
Speaker1	The arbitrariness of this claim now seemed apparent to me—a judgment my grandfather had made long ago on the basis of his conscience, but then denied all others the right to do likewise.
Speaker1	At Westboro, when outsiders reminded us of the many contradictions among the various versions of the Bible and questioned our use of the KJV, I instinctively avoided answering their positions directly.
Speaker1	“Because Gramps said so” would seem not to be a very convincing argument.
Speaker1	No better than “The Bible is true because my wicked heart says so,” I thought, remembering the paradox that had caused me to doubt the Bible’s infallibility in the first place.
Speaker1	I had hoped that Brother Alt’s sermon would shed some light on this question, but the longer I listened, the more fragile his case seemed.
Speaker1	Perhaps because the speaker was not my beloved mother or grandfather or relative, I listened to his sermon more critically than I ever had at Westboro.
Speaker1	He began with a quote wherein the Bible describes the Bible’s goodness.
Speaker1	All Scripture is inspired of God and beneficial for teaching, for reproving, for setting things straight, for disciplining in righteousness, so that the man of God may be fully competent, completely equipped for every good work.
Speaker1	In my head echoed the dry words of the BBC’s Louis Theroux, who refuted this sort of circular logic in his second documentary about Westboro: “Well, the Bible would say that, wouldn’t it?”
Speaker1	Brother Alt continued.
Speaker1	“Some people say, ‘Experience is the best teacher.’ No.
Speaker1	The Bible is the best teacher.”
Speaker1	I surreptitiously glanced around at the faces scattered throughout the hall, rapt and nodding.
Speaker1	His words rang hollow in my ears—as if simply asserting such a thing could make it true—but I knew that only months earlier, I would have accepted this idea without doubts, as this congregation now seemed to.
Speaker1	“Human advice leaves something to be desired, but not so with the Bible,” he said.
Speaker1	“It provides the best guidance in the world.” I couldn’t dispute that the Scriptures were filled with practical advice, meditations on human nature, and beautiful sentiments that I could never imagine rejecting.
Speaker1	Love your enemies.
Speaker1	Better is a little with righteousness than great revenues without right.
Speaker1	He that answereth a matter before he heareth it, it is a folly and shame unto him.
Speaker1	Hatred stirreth up strifes: but love covereth all sins.
Speaker1	But what of the tale of the Levite and his dismembered concubine?
Speaker1	And God’s commandment to put disobedient children to death?
Speaker1	His threat to punish idolaters by causing them to eat the flesh of their sons, of their daughters, and of their friends?
Speaker1	I listened to Brother Alt extol the virtues of the Scriptures without qualification, and I felt resistance growing inside me.
Speaker1	As I had for weeks now, I kept coming back to the image of the Almighty that my mother had first explained to me as a child holding a Barbie in the backseat of our old Camry: the divine Potter of Romans 9, fashioning a tiny group to join Him in Heaven, while sentencing the teeming billions to pass the eons of eternity in exquisite, ever-increasing torment for sins He caused them to commit—simply because it pleased Him to torture them.
Speaker1	Could there be any clearer portrait of evil?
Speaker1	I simply could not believe that this was good in any sense of the word.
Speaker1	More important, I simply did not believe it—however fearful I was to declare it plainly, even in my own mind.
Speaker1	Regardless of what the Bible said.
Speaker1	At the conclusion of the sermon, Laura introduced Grace and me to several cheerful women who welcomed us with warmth and genuine interest, and then she led us to the cabinets filled with Witness publications.
Speaker1	There were dozens of stacks of books and Bible tracts, but she found what she was looking for—a small yellow book with “What Does the Bible Really Teach?” emblazoned on the cover—and offered to go through it with us back at the inn.
Speaker1	I nodded.
Speaker1	“Please.”
Speaker1	I didn’t want to offend my new friends by launching into a critique of Brother Alt’s talk, so I was vague and quiet on the forty-five-minute drive through the darkness back to Deadwood.
Speaker1	With Grace sprawled across the backseat, her hair strewn across my lap as I scratched her head, I pondered my doubts and tried to make sense of what it all meant.
Speaker1	MEGAN: Chad.
Speaker1	Is the Bible just another book?
Speaker1	One with beautiful language and compelling stories—but not divine?
Speaker1	Like reading David Foster Wallace’s speech at Kenyon College and being moved (to feeling, to action) via words like “on fire with the same force that lit the stars”—but not thinking he’s God or speaks for God or that every word he says has to be obeyed?
Speaker1	But as he’d done so many times since I left Westboro, Chad declined to share his thoughts on the question with me.
Speaker1	We could speak of music and movies, tech and television, but when it came to matters of belief, he would change the subject instead of offering an opinion.
Speaker1	I found it frustrating, but I understood why he did it.
Speaker1	I hadn’t been so malleable since I was a child, and he was taking great pains to avoid unduly influencing me.
Speaker1	He wanted to know where my own heart and thoughts would lead me.
Speaker1	If I was going to grow out of the mental and emotional boundaries that had so long characterized my existence—the bounds of my habitation—I would need to forge my own path.
Speaker1	I awoke before dawn one morning in early January, my left hand still protectively covering my phone beneath the pillow.
Speaker1	Like most nights, I had fallen asleep texting Chad.
Speaker1	And like most mornings, I would begin my day stalking my family on Twitter.
Speaker1	Within days of my departure from Westboro, several members of the church had proactively blocked me from viewing their posts on the platform.
Speaker1	I had created a fake account in response, one whose sole use would be following—but never engaging—every account associated with the church.
Speaker1	I recognized Twitter as the only real window into my family’s lives and daily activities.
Speaker1	They might be holding signs in every photo, but where else could I see my parents and siblings?
Speaker1	How else could I know what they were up to?
Speaker1	Not even I thought this was a particularly healthy habit for me to cultivate—like Emily in Our Town, reliving the days of her former existence—and in the beginning, I had tried to limit the time I spent staring into the past at my old life.
Speaker1	Now, I didn’t even make the attempt.
Speaker1	I understood that it would be pathetic and sad to spend my days watching other people live via social media, a waste of the new life and freedom I now had.
Speaker1	Still, whenever I encountered resistance from Grace, Newbery, Libby, even Dustin and Laura, I justified the time I spent with a new hope taking root inside me:
Speaker1	What if someone could get through to them?
Speaker1	While it was tempting to despair that Westboro would ever change, I couldn’t forget the obvious counterpoint: that I had changed.
Speaker1	I had been zealous, dedicated, and absolutely convinced of our cause.
Speaker1	True, I had spent my final months at the church trying without success to change their hearts and minds—but if I could be convinced, it stood to reason that others could be, as well.
Speaker1	Part of my motive was undeniably selfish: I was desperate to have my loved ones back in my life, to lose the howling pain that held my insides in a vise grip.
Speaker1	But it was becoming clear that this wasn’t the only reason we should try to persuade church members away from their views.
Speaker1	Like the rest of the country, I had watched in horror at the news coverage of the December shooting at Sandy Hook Elementary School.
Speaker1	I knew what my family would say, but I was still saddened and dismayed to watch the scene play out the way it had so many times before: an eruption of tweets and news releases pouring salt into the gaping wounds of the victims’ families, celebrating the mass murder of first-graders as the condign wrath of God, and vowing to protest the memorials.
Speaker1	PRAY FOR MORE DEAD KIDS, the sign read.
Speaker1	My relief at not participating was tempered by distress at the number of times I had done exactly the same—and to more families than I could guess.
Speaker1	I couldn’t undo anything I’d done, but didn’t I have a responsibility to do something?
Speaker1	If Grace and I could find a way to convince our family to change their minds, or even to moderate their positions, maybe we could help save other families some of this added pain.
Speaker1	Scrolling through my family’s tweets that morning, though, I understood that Twitter was a double-edged sword.
Speaker1	#WhereIsMeganPhelpsRoper was the hashtag, speculation by Westboro detractors who noted my unusual absence from the platform.
Speaker1	Twitter connected one especially hard-core critic with a Topekan, who was dispatched to drive by my home in search of my car, and by church protests to see if I could be spotted on the picket line.
Speaker1	I panicked reading their exchanges and their taunts to my mother, bile continuing to rise in my throat as I found a Facebook message from a Topeka reporter—cleverly worded such that if I didn’t provide a response, she could assume that I had left Westboro.
Speaker1	I pounced on Grace the moment she woke up, trying not to let myself become overwhelmed by my panic as I read the messages aloud.
Speaker1	It felt like being hunted.
Speaker1	Forced to publicly reckon with a past I was still trying to understand, a present I was wholly unprepared to navigate, and a future that remained a terrifying abyss.
Speaker1	Clearly, we were going to have to say something—but what?
Speaker1	Grace led the way out of the attic and down the hidden stairway to the kitchen, where we found Dustin and Laura eating breakfast.
Speaker1	They would help us figure this out.
Speaker1	“Why do we owe anyone an explanation for anything?
Speaker1	Why do they get to care?
Speaker1	!” Grace exploded in the middle of the discussion, angry at our having been put in this position.
Speaker1	I couldn’t blame her, exactly, but the question felt shortsighted to me.
Speaker1	“The way we did things at home…” I started.
Speaker1	“We put everything out there.
Speaker1	We lived our whole lives in front of cameras and reporters.
Speaker1	We spent our days preaching a message that hurt so many people, and all of that is public—so public—and we spent years working hard to make it that way.
Speaker1	Twitter, YouTube, Facebook, all those interviews and news articles … all those things are still out there.
Speaker1	Maybe we don’t ‘owe’ people anything … but I feel like we do.”
Speaker1	“And right now,” Dustin pointed out, “that’s who you guys are to the world.
Speaker1	You are ‘God Hates Fags.’ If you don’t think that’s true anymore, you’ll want to do something to change that.”
Speaker1	Laura looked pensive and nodded.
Speaker1	“I understand how you feel, Grace.
Speaker1	I think I’d feel the same way in your position … but it’s a little more complicated than that.”
Speaker1	“Okay,” I said, after a tense silence.
Speaker1	“I’ll try to write something, and we can look at it together later.”
Speaker1	I picked up my phone and wandered out to the living room, tucking myself into the green couch by the big window and staring, unseeing, at the pine forests up the hill.
Speaker1	Where would I even begin?
Speaker1	Should I try to explain why I had done and said the things I had while I was at Westboro?
Speaker1	Should I unequivocally apologize for everything?
Speaker1	What exactly did I feel sorry for?
Speaker1	When I saw Laura shuffling across the hardwood floor in her stocking feet, I turned sideways, pushing myself up to sit on the arm of the sofa while she took the seat next to me.
Speaker1	It hadn’t taken long for Grace and me to invite her into our circle of shoulder massages and head scratches, and I was comforted by the remnants of our happy life back home.
Speaker1	Laura sat quietly as my mind leafed through the pages of my memory, searching, but I wasn’t sure what for.
Speaker1	I narrated the scenes to her aloud.
Speaker1	Those sweltering early days at Gage Park, surrounded by loved ones in fanny packs, my tiny fists wrapped around the edges of a sign I couldn’t read.
Speaker1	How upset I’d been at age twelve after Matthew Shepard’s death, not because of his murder, but because it wasn’t my turn to travel to picket his funeral.
Speaker1	I remembered the day Josh left—I’d been eighteen for a few months at that point, so I could have left the church then.
Speaker1	Technically, I’d had that choice.
Speaker1	“I’m not sure where you’re going with this,” Laura said.
Speaker1	“I guess I’m looking for a line,” I told her.
Speaker1	“Am I responsible for what I did at Westboro after I turned eighteen—and my parents, everything before?” I didn’t wait for an answer.
Speaker1	“But turning eighteen didn’t magically wipe out all the years before it.
Speaker1	I might have had the legal choice to leave, but how could I possibly have done it?
Speaker1	Every part of my life hinged on the belief that leaving would only bring me Hell and destruction—and that staying was good and righteous.
Speaker1	I just couldn’t leave until I saw differently.
Speaker1	How could I?”
Speaker1	As I reasoned aloud, another thought occurred to me: Wasn’t the same true of my mom?
Speaker1	The indoctrination, the physical enforcement, the absolute unwillingness to tolerate dissent of any kind—all of these had been hallmarks of my mother’s upbringing, too.
Speaker1	The fact that she was now in her fifties didn’t suddenly give her the freedom to throw off the shackles of those beliefs.
Speaker1	If anything, it just meant that she’d had more years to marinate in them.
Speaker1	She could no more decide to deny those ideas than she could spontaneously decide not to believe in the existence of gravity.
Speaker1	“Who do you think is responsible, then?” Laura asked.
Speaker1	“Your grandfather?”
Speaker1	I shook my head and continued to pull my fingers through her hair.
Speaker1	“I don’t know.
Speaker1	He didn’t invent these ideas, either.” I told her about the sermon that Gramps gave after the September 11 attacks, how amazed I’d been to see that the doctrines we preached had once been mainstream.
Speaker1	In high school, one of my English textbooks had contained “Sinners in the Hands of an Angry God,” a famous fire-and-brimstone sermon by the influential American theologian Jonathan Edwards.
Speaker1	The sermon sounded so much like my grandfather that it was startling, and the beliefs it espoused were by no means fringe at the time it was preached.
Speaker1	Edwards himself was even president of the college that would later become known as Princeton University—not a reviled man, but honored and respected.
Speaker1	“So here’s a question for you, Megan.” Laura’s voice was gentle.
Speaker1	“Does it really matter where that line of responsibility lies?
Speaker1	Would knowing that change anything about where you go from here?”
Speaker1	“It really is a moot point, isn’t it?” I said after a minute.
Speaker1	She was right.
Speaker1	Ultimately, it didn’t matter how much any single one of us was responsible for any particular wrong we had wrought in the world.
Speaker1	It was good that we hadn’t intended to do evil, but our intentions didn’t erase the harm we’d done.
Speaker1	The fact was that harm was done, and what mattered now was finding a way to address it.
Speaker1	“I guess I just want to say that I’m truly not looking to avoid taking responsibility for my actions,” I clarified.
Speaker1	“That isn’t really the point of the question.
Speaker1	I think the point is that … I just have a hard time blaming my family.
Speaker1	I don’t think they’re bad people.
Speaker1	I think they’re good people who have been trapped by bad ideas … There just has to be a way out.”
Speaker1	He finally called me on the phone late one snowy evening.
Speaker1	I’d already known that I loved his words and his humor and his biting wit, but that night I fell in love with his voice: soft and sonorous with just a hint of country twang.
Speaker1	I paced the creaky wood floors of the inn’s old library as Chad and I talked for nearly an hour, my fingers twisting in my curls, daydreaming of the time when his would do the same.
Speaker1	Other than to have my family back, I can’t recall ever wanting anything in my life as much as I wanted to meet him, to see him with my real eyes for really real in real life.
Speaker1	It seemed that he didn’t want the same, though, despite his words to the contrary: he had already twice reneged on his commitment to come see me in Deadwood.
Speaker1	Back in December, he hadn’t told me that he had canceled his plans to visit the Hills after Christmas.
Speaker1	He just became withdrawn.
Speaker1	Slow to respond.
Speaker1	I got the message.
Speaker1	MEGAN: You’re so careful with me, Chad.
Speaker1	Oh, so careful.
Speaker1	Are you always so cautious?
Speaker1	CHAD: I’m not cautious.
Speaker1	I’m Scandinavian.
Speaker1	I’m shy and loud.
Speaker1	I like the intimacy of large parties.
Speaker1	Meg.
Speaker1	I’m almost 40.
Speaker1	You’re not.
Speaker1	MEGAN: I’ve face-planted so many more times than you.
Speaker1	I talk too fast.
Speaker1	I used to picket soldiers’ funerals.
Speaker1	CHAD: When I smile, the sides of my eyes wrinkle.
Speaker1	I smile often.
Speaker1	When I was 26, that didn’t happen.
Speaker1	I’ll see you out there somehow, before you leave.
Speaker1	In spite of myself, I fell for his promise.
Speaker1	My heart soared at the prospect of finally laying eyes on my constant companion, this friend who also happened to be—quite literally—the man of my dreams.
Speaker1	And then, as the day of my departure from Deadwood neared, mid-January, it happened again.
Speaker1	I knew that Chad had more than a little anxiety about our situation, but my feelings for him far outweighed my own doubts and caused me to dismiss the ones he described so elliptically.
Speaker1	Some of his worries were of the more average kind: whether we would be attracted to one another in person, whether our age difference would prove insurmountable.
Speaker1	But there were far more significant ones, too.
Speaker1	Though it felt like years to me, I’d only lived outside of Westboro for two months at that point—certainly not enough time to have developed an entirely new worldview and identity.
Speaker1	He didn’t know who I was becoming or what I believed, and neither did I.
Speaker1	He also suspected that I might still be a member of the church, sent to try to lure him to Topeka.
Speaker1	I’d heard that this was a tactic sometimes used by other fringe groups to boost membership, but it was so utterly unthinkable at Westboro that I laughed out loud at this scenario.
Speaker1	At the time, I just couldn’t conceive that the weight of these anxieties was enough to justify all the hesitation and mixed signals.
Speaker1	MEGAN: I literally feel insane.
Speaker1	I had hoped you would come, but I thought this would happen.
Speaker1	In the future, you should be careful.
Speaker1	Especially when you know you’re being misunderstood.
Speaker1	You’ll save a heart (or hearts) a lot of pain.
Speaker1	CHAD: Seems a little dramatic and precious for a guy that was trying to get the nerve to ask her to dance.
Speaker1	It’s a common plot line, and the movie rarely ends with it.
Speaker1	I felt pathetic for trying to convince him, for wanting so badly something that he so clearly did not.
Speaker1	Did I have so little self-respect that I couldn’t just take the hint?
Speaker1	I decided to spend my final days in South Dakota with Daisy, Gatsby, and their doomed romance—a nod to our beginnings and apropos for our demise.
Speaker1	And still—still—I couldn’t let it go.
Speaker1	Jan. 11, 2013—Day 25
Speaker1	The Great Gatsby
Speaker1	Reserving judgments is a matter of infinite hope.
Speaker1	“You know … you guys don’t actually have to leave if you don’t want to.”
Speaker1	My knife froze mid-chop, and I stared up at Laura, who was busy transferring a loaf of homemade sourdough into a hot cast-iron pan.
Speaker1	Dinnertime at the inn.
Speaker1	“Yeah,” Dustin agreed.
Speaker1	“You can stay with us for as long as you need or as long as it’s helpful.”
Speaker1	Grace and I looked at each other with wide eyes.
Speaker1	“Really?” she asked.
Speaker1	“Oh, my God!” I gasped, and we all laughed.
Speaker1	The prospect overwhelmed me with gratitude.
Speaker1	We were nearing the end of our time in Deadwood, and the thought of returning to Kansas filled me with dread.
Speaker1	I loved my brother Josh and his family, and I wanted to spend time with Libby—but they lived at the epicenter of trauma.
Speaker1	How could I leave this place and return to that?
Speaker1	The inn was the first place I had felt safe, tucked in among the expanse of the Black Hills.
Speaker1	The landscape was so muted and lovely, and it made me feel small in the very best way.
Speaker1	It gave me hope.
Speaker1	I knew that Grace didn’t feel the same way, that I’d have to work hard to convince her—but at least now there was a chance we could stay.
Speaker1	I wondered what the Floyds were thinking to offer such generosity to two girls they had only just met—but in that moment, I was afraid to ask for fear they might reconsider.
Speaker1	Years later, as Dustin and Laura and I reminisced about the earliest days of our friendship, Laura would answer that question by sharing a few of her journal entries with me.
Speaker1	I so much want to help.
Speaker1	I know Megan really loves it out here, and seems to be enjoying the time away.
Speaker1	Grace is on less comfortable footing, I think.
Speaker1	She doesn’t like the snow (it’s been doing that a lot), she’s homesick, and she seems to be—I actually don’t know how I was going to finish that sentence.
Speaker1	I’ve been trying to draw her out with bribes of fresh-baked bread and access to all the local libraries.
Speaker1	More than anything, I suspect the most useful thing I can do is be a friend.
Speaker1	We went out into the Hills for the Grand Tour yesterday and they started in with questions about what we believe.
Speaker1	We talked about free will and hell and birth control and gay marriage and a dozen things in between.
Speaker1	I am quite amazed about how many basic beliefs we have in common, which “regular” churches do according to tradition rather than biblical guidelines (not celebrating holidays, staying out of politics, the desire to warn other people that their course may be wrong, etc.).
Speaker1	But where we choose a path based on showing love in a kind, humble and patient way, the WBC is, well … accused of being a hate group.
Speaker1	They also took the opportunity of our outing to revel a bit in certain new-found freedoms.
Speaker1	They talked about getting haircuts and bought clip-on earrings (for a test-drive before committing to actual holes), and were flaunting flashy colors of nail polish.
Speaker1	Yesterday evening they went out looking for a New Year’s party to crash and today Megan was trying to get a buzz (off 7up and brandy) in order to write a tipsy letter.
Speaker1	It’s kind of fun to see them trying to find their feet in this new life of theirs.
Speaker1	And I’m pleased to say that we’re probably the mildest possible influences for such an exploration.
Speaker1	I’d also like to say that I really like them, and am so delighted that we’ve had this opportunity to get to know them, and hopefully help in some way.
Speaker1	Reading Laura’s account of those times, I laughed remembering how childlike we could be, that roller coaster of trepidation and wonder, guilt and exuberance, despair at our loss and delight at the smallest of freedoms.
Speaker1	I marveled again at my good fortune, at how a random booking on Airbnb had brought my sister and me to such warmhearted people to help us navigate the squalls of our new reality.
Speaker1	At how quickly our friendship helped me understand that it was possible to love someone—to be close to someone—even while seeing the world in a wildly different way.
Speaker1	Can two walk together, except they be agreed?
Speaker1	The answer to this rhetorical question—“Of course not!”—had always been obvious and obviously true, but it seemed like such a simplistic notion to me now.
Speaker1	The idea that agreement was a prerequisite for friendship.
Speaker1	That comity required conformity.
Speaker1	My friendship with Dustin and Laura had so quickly helped me arrive at the opposite conclusion, and it seemed as obvious to me now as the original once had.
Speaker1	Can two walk together, even if they disagree?
Speaker1	Of course we could.
Speaker1	Not exactly revolutionary, but I couldn’t help feeling that it was.
