






3. The Wars of the Lord

Three days after nineteen hijackers crashed four commercial aircraft into the World Trade Center towers, the Pentagon, and a field in rural Pennsylvania, a lamentation sounded forth from Westboro Baptist Church pastor Fred Phelps. It was not a mournful cry for the thousands who had been murdered. It did not echo the grieving prayers sent up by thousands more whose loved ones had perished in wreckage and rubble. It did not reverberate with the near-universal horror that overtook the world, nor with anguish at the unspeakable atrocities that human beings are capable of visiting upon one another. To my grandfather, such sentimentalities were entirely beside the point—and therein lay his grief. For three days straight, the American media juggernaut had been a continual dirge, wholly devoted to the “caterwauling” of preachers, pundits, and politicians alike. Of all the “backslidden, hypocritical” preachers and “self-aggrandizing” politicians whose words were filling the airwaves, my grandfather insisted that not a single one was speaking a word of truth as far as the Word of God was concerned. And the truth was that in the council halls of eternity, God Himself had issued the command, sending those airplanes like missiles through time and space, casting down these symbols of American strength and vitality in punishment for her great sins: homosexuality, adultery, fornication, idolatry, rebellion.
There was no sound among the congregation as our pastor spoke. Not a cough or a sneeze, not even from the babies—just a somber stillness as we contemplated the exhortations of this holy preacher, referred to as a star in the right hand of God in the book of Revelation. Regardless of how unpopular or unpalatable his message, we trusted him to preach it with complete faithfulness to the Scriptures, without ambiguity and without timidity, as he’d done for more than fifty years. He didn’t have the praise of the world, and he didn’t seek it. His work was unpaid as a matter of principle. My grandfather would have no financial conflicts of interest, no incentive to abridge the Bible the way he so frequently accused others of doing. That my grandfather kept himself from such sordid concerns was another layer of assurance of his dedication to preaching the unvarnished Word of God.
I never saw the confidence we had in our pastor as being rooted in the familial relationship he shared with about eighty percent of us, though this was generally presumed by outsiders to be the case. It was a galling thought—as if we, unique among human beings, would be forever possessed of our childhood credulity. As if all our faculties of reason, perception, and will could be entirely overruled by blood relation. It seemed that the goal of this assertion was to render us blind followers of an angry patriarch—because if we could be dismissed as such, it meant that no one need fear the wrath of the God we preached. In truth, the familial nature of Westboro’s ministry tended to make us, his children and grandchildren, more skeptical of our pastor, not less. As hecklers and journalists so frequently pointed to it as evidence of the lemming-like nature of our following, his status as “Gramps” became a pit out of which my grandfather had to climb. The burden of proof weighed the more heavily on him as a result, and he delighted in meeting that burden, utilizing every tool at his disposal to demonstrate the errors of the masses, their failures of logic, law, history, Scripture, righteousness.
My grandfather continued his sermon, which was—like all his sermons—laden with Bible quotes and references to expositors and theologians, evidence to support his frequent assertion that “I do not make this stuff up!” He never appealed to his own authority. Today’s sermon was a freewheeling condemnation of “fag America,” delivered in an old-time fire-and-brimstone polemic. But he wasn’t speaking only or even primarily to those of us seated in the austere sanctuary—1960s-era wood-veneer paneling, pews to seat about a hundred, devoid of iconography except a few new picket signs propped on easels flanking the pulpit (THANK GOD FOR SEPT. 11), and carpet a friend would later describe as “shockingly mauve.” This special sermon would be uploaded to GodHatesFags.com, an address to the nation intended to make the power brokers of the world stand up and take notice. He contrasted America’s maudlin response to the carnage of September 11 to England’s godly call for repentance in 1666, when the Great Fire blazed through London leaving immense destruction in its wake. He pointed to the old Puritan preachers who had seen the hand of God in that conflagration, proclaiming that the Almighty was punishing the inhabitants of London for their sins—and that England was doomed if they failed to heed God’s warning and repent.
As a fifteen-year-old, I was familiar with some of the Scriptural support for this theology, but it had failed to crystallize in my mind the way it did sitting in my pew that day. My formative years were an endless stream of opportunities to learn the church’s culture emphasizing the celebration and mockery of tragedy and death, and I had fully assimilated into that culture by the time 9/11 rolled around. Any misgivings I might have had were long since snuffed out by the verses demonstrating the example of our God, who had declared, Because I have called, and ye refused; I have stretched out my hand, and no man regarded; I also will laugh at your calamity; I will mock when your fear cometh. And then there was the passage in the book of Psalms: The righteous shall rejoice when he seeth the vengeance: he shall wash his feet in the blood of the wicked. By age eleven, I was standing on the picket line exultantly repeating the words I’d heard from Gramps: “Two whores in a week!” I fancied myself cutely counterculture to be reveling in the deaths of two widely beloved women, though I had little knowledge of either Mother Teresa or Diana, Princess of Wales. No matter. When their deaths came just a few days apart, I knew all I needed: that the one was Catholic, and the other an adulteress. Elton John rewrote his song “Candle in the Wind” in tribute to Lady Diana, and less than twenty-four hours after he performed it at her funeral service, I was singing along to a chilling parody written by my mom and my aunt:

Goodbye, royal whore
Though you never spoke the truth
You know and hear it now
As do all of this world’s youth
You crashed into the stone wall
As you played your whorish games
They set you on a pedestal
And bow down to your name
But it seems to me you lived your life
Like a harlot full of sin
God cut you off
Now the flames set in
And you know we told you, though you’re
A throne away
Your name will die out long before
The pain will ever sway

Similar scenes played out following every death that caught my grandfather’s attention, everyone from Matthew Shepard (“His lying fag friends can’t help him now!”) to Mr. Rogers (“Sissy Pied Piper From Hell”). Day after day, month after month, year after year, I took in the gleeful reactions that Gramps modeled until they became mine. On the morning of 9/11, there was only a split second between a classmate’s frantic announcement of the attacks and my genuine excitement and glee at the demise of “those evil people.” I knew my lines. When the mayor of New York announced, “We will rebuild,” my memory called up the verse: We will return and build the desolate places; thus saith the Lord of hosts, They shall build, but I will throw down. When “United We Stand” became the national rallying cry, the simplest retort came from the book of Proverbs: Though hand join in hand, the wicked shall not be unpunished. And when other Christians insisted that God was not responsible for the calamity that had befallen the American people, many were the passages we would quote to confound their claims: shall there be evil in a city, and the Lord hath not done it? And again, God insists, See now that I, even I, am he, and there is no god with me: I kill, and I make alive; I wound, and I heal: neither is there any that can deliver out of my hand. And the Apostle Paul reminds the Ephesians, For this ye know, that no whoremonger, nor unclean person, nor covetous man, who is an idolater, hath any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and of God. Let no man deceive you with vain words: for because of these things cometh the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience. This last passage implies that some would deny a causal connection between the sins of men and the wrath of God—and declares that such denials are but vain words intended to deceive.
Clearly, the whole world was deceived—but we weren’t. How lucky we were to have the favor of God.
What stirred me most during my grandfather’s sermon that September day wasn’t just the oft-repeated refrains from the Bible; it was the historical context he had given these events. He had invoked “the Puritans of old England,” and the wheels turning in my mind almost audibly screeched to a halt. There had been people outside of the Bible who actually believed what we believed? It struck me as unlikely if not impossible, my surprise betraying how acutely myopic was my perspective at the time. As I experienced it, the modern world had always been deeply inhospitable to our beliefs, and it was easy to feel as if Westboro were an island existing outside of time, the one true connection to a righteous past—the lone bastion of truth in this “insane orgy of fag lies,” as Gramps was wont to say. He never needed to come right out and declare that our church was the only way to Heaven, not explicitly; that kind of sweeping assertion isn’t so easy to substantiate, and certainly would have invited much more suspicion and scrutiny from my highly analytical family.
Instead, my grandfather studied other churches extensively, teaching us all the ways they were full of error and sin. Methodists? Works righteousness. Catholics? Idolaters. Lutherans? Lukewarm idolaters. He referred to them as “social clubs” with little interest in knowing or doing what God required of them. In the era of megachurches and multimillionaire preachers of the prosperity gospel like Joel Osteen, he found the perfect foil: perverse disputings of men of corrupt minds, and destitute of the truth, supposing that gain is godliness. To us, such pastors were motivated by money, smoothing away the hard corners and sharp edges of Bible truths, sculpting them into enticing figurines to package and sell to ever larger congregations that sought not truth but comfort: which say to the prophets, Prophesy not unto us right things, speak unto us smooth things, prophesy deceits.
Divorce and remarriage had become a national pastime since the institution of no-fault divorce laws in the 1970s, and now “the pews of these churches—these whorehouses, these dog kennels!—are littered with divorced and remarried people! The Lord Jesus Christ calls them adulterers!” And indeed He had: Whosoever putteth away his wife, and marrieth another, committeth adultery: and whosoever marrieth her that is put away from her husband committeth adultery. Voice dripping with disdain, my grandfather railed against “Christians” so often in his weekly sermons that I spent my elementary school years believing the term to be synonymous with “evil” and denying that it applied to me. In the end, we drew the obvious conclusion from his attacks on other faiths—fortified by direct Bible quotes that we carefully memorized: that Westboro was the only safe haven from the wrath of God, both in this life and in the world to come.
But the Puritans had believed—or so Gramps declared. When the special 9/11 sermon came to a close, I walked home across our common backyard, flipped open the lid of my laptop, and brought up Google, searching for evidence of Gramps’s assertion about the destruction of London. Had the Puritans really believed as we did? Did their contemporaries believe them to be the crazy, hateful zealots that ours considered us? It didn’t take long for me to light upon the words of James Janeway, a popular Puritan minister and writer. To a city ravaged first by the Great Plague and just after by the Great Fire, Janeway wrote:

The Great and Dreadful God hath been pleading with poor England in these last Years […], and written Divine Displeasure in Letters of Blood. The Righteous Judge began his Circuit the last Year in London, and in that one City above one hundred thousand received the Sentence of Death from his just Tribunal. He hath not yet ended his dismal Circuit, but he rideth still […], pleading his Cause with us in a lamentable Fire, which in a few Days space, hath turned one of the most glorious Cities in the World to Ashes. The Voice of the Sword was not heard; the Language of the Plague was not understood; wherefore the dreadful Jehovah speaks louder and louder still […]. O stupid Creatures that we are, when shall we hear the Rod and him that appointed it!

I read on, astounded. Here it was, yet more proof—objective proof—that Gramps wasn’t just a hateful man fabricating these doctrines to bolster his preexisting prejudices, as the case was often made. Janeway was even quoting the same verses that my grandfather had. I would soon come to learn that this wasn’t the only Westboro doctrine deeply rooted in major branches of Christian theological tradition. My mother had so carefully used Barbies and Bible verses to explain the concept of predestination to my sister Bekah and me, but centuries before Westboro existed, this view was espoused by Christians the world over. It was popularized by the reformed theologian John Calvin and summarized by the acronym TULIP, which my grandfather put on a sign that hung behind his pulpit for years:
Total Depravity: All humans are, by nature, slaves to sin and incapable of choosing to follow God.
Unconditional Election: God has chosen who will be saved based solely on His mercy, not their merit.
Limited Atonement: God could have chosen to save all men, but sent Jesus to die only for His elect.
Irresistible Grace: Those chosen by God have no power to resist His call to salvation.
Perseverance of the Saints: God’s elect will persevere to the end and be saved.
These beliefs had long since fallen out of favor with the wider Christian community, and we understood their “evolution”—belief in free will, in universal salvation, in the idea that God loves all of mankind—to be apostasy and betrayal of the plain words of Scripture. The foolish shall not stand in thy sight: thou hatest all workers of iniquity. But all of this history, the venerable past of so many of our core doctrines, lent our pastor a substantial new credibility to my mind—and at age fifteen, I found myself newly humbled by his knowledge and understanding. I had always believed him to be intelligent and guided by God, but youthful condescension had led me to underestimate him. He was an old man, had trouble understanding technology, frequently slept with the news blaring all night long, and generally smelled of a potent mix of tea tree oil and the cloves of raw garlic he began consuming in copious quantities after watching a segment about its health benefits on one of the television morning shows. Jesus said, No prophet is accepted in his own country, and that rang true to me; it’s easier to accept a human as divinely ordained when you’re not intimately familiar with the mundanity of their daily life and the eccentricities of their personality. Church members also actively denied that my grandfather’s history mattered at all, except insofar as it reflected the path on which God had led him; because God had predestinated all things, nothing about our pastor’s life or decisions could be attributed to him or his influence as an individual. For a long time, both this perspective and the quotidian realities I witnessed caused me to largely dismiss the complex history of a complicated man—a history that multiplied questions like a hydra, each answer producing twice as many curiosities as the one it sought to address.

Instead of replacing her surname with his, my mother combined the two when she married my father in 1983. It would be the name they gave to their eleven children: Phelps-Roper. “We wanted you kids to have the Phelps name. That name means something around here. It’s part of your legacy.” When my mother made this comment, I presumed she meant the legacy of the picketing; it’s what we were known for, and what was getting us ever more attention in the press. Later, though, when I heard her telling one of my siblings the same story, I realized the obvious: that if the picketing didn’t begin until after her sixth child was born, there must have been another part of this legacy. What had it been? “Oh, honey,” my mom said, “long before this city hated us for picketing, they hated us for defending the rights of black people.”
As the stories were told to me, my grandparents moved to Topeka with their young son in the spring of 1954, when the city was at the heart of a nationwide civil rights battle. Their arrival coincided with the publication of the United States Supreme Court’s decision in the landmark case Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka. The Court had ruled against the city, overturning the previous “separate but equal” standard and banning racial segregation in state-run schools, which Topeka had fought all the way to the highest court in the land in order to maintain. Born in 1929, Gramps had grown up in Meridian, Mississippi, in the deep South—a place where first slavery and then segregation had had roots sunk deep. “He saw the way those black people were treated,” my mother told me, “and by the mercy of God, he knew it was wrong.” She quoted to me and my siblings the same verses that her father had quoted to her and her siblings: One law shall be to him that is homeborn, and unto the stranger that sojourneth among you, because God hath made of one blood all nations of men for to dwell on all the face of the earth. In the eyes of the law, all must be equal.
But the ministry brought my family to Topeka, not the civil rights movement. In spite of his father’s best efforts to prepare him for a career in the military, my grandfather had become a preacher instead. He grew up a quiet, studious child in a highly respected family, and was a high achiever. He graduated high school at sixteen, sixth in his class, an Eagle Scout, Golden Gloves boxer, recipient of an American Legion Citizenship Award, class commencement speaker, and the best-drilled member of the Mississippi Junior State Guard. His father worked hard to help him secure a principal appointment to the United States Military Academy at West Point, but because candidates must be at least seventeen years old, my grandfather had to wait several months before he would be able to matriculate. During those months, he attended a tent revival meeting at a local Methodist church in Meridian and “got saved.” Gramps described that event as “a genuine religious experience” and “an unction or impulse on the heart,” referencing the verse that declares that ye have an unction from the Holy One, and ye know all things. The sermon my grandfather heard that day was the parable of the wedding feast, in which Jesus likens the kingdom of heaven to a certain king who makes a feast for the marriage of his son, and sends his servants to bid the invitees to come: But they made light of it, and went their ways, one to his farm, another to his merchandise: And the remnant took his servants, and entreated them spitefully, and slew them. But when the king heard thereof, he was wroth: and he sent forth his armies, and destroyed those murderers, and burned up their city. The parable continues, but this part was frightfully compelling to my grandfather, the fate of the men who were bidden to the feast and the pitiful excuses they gave for their refusal to come—their work. Their livelihood. He would not be one of those wretched men to spurn Heaven itself, but one of the servants who would call the world to the feast. All the dreams he and his father had shared, all the plans they’d made, all the work they’d done to get my grandfather into West Point became irrelevant in the face of God Himself calling my grandfather to become a preacher. His father was furious, but Gramps’s decision was made.
Between his high school graduation in 1946 and the summer of 1951, my grandfather never seemed to stay in one place for very long, enrolling variously at Bob Jones University, the famed evangelical school then located in Cleveland, Tennessee; at Prairie Bible Institute in Three Hills, Alberta, Canada; and at John Muir College in Pasadena, California, where he earned an associate’s degree in engineering in 1951. He left Bob Jones because of their racial discrimination in excluding black students from the university, but not before embarking on a mission assignment during summer break in 1947. He traveled to Vernal, Utah, where he worked as a seventeen-year-old missionary to the Ute Indians, and on September 8, 1947, he was baptized and ordained to the ministry by the pastor of the First Baptist Church there, both of them wading into a cold mountain stream so the pastor could fully immerse my grandfather beneath the running water—the true Baptist way.
His first taste of notoriety came when my grandfather was profiled in Time magazine in June 1951. He kept a framed print of the story on the wall of his office for as long as I can remember, and I read it often over the years, laughing at the image it painted of my twenty-one-year-old Gramps, unmistakable and utterly unchanged by the decades that had passed: stern-faced and pleading, holding an open Bible in one hand and gesticulating with the other.

Five-year-old John Muir College at Pasadena (enrollment: 2,000) has no more than the average quota of campus sin. But to Fred Phelps, 21, a tall (6 ft. 3 in.), craggy-faced engineering student from Meridian, Miss., John Muir is a weed-grown vineyard. Day after day this spring he has called upon his fellow students to repent. His method: to walk up to groups of boys and girls munching their lunchtime sandwiches in the quadrangle, ask “May I say a few words?” and launch into a talk. Fred Phelps’s talks drew crowds of up to 100. Over and over he denounced the “sins committed on campus by students and teachers … promiscuous petting … evil language … profanity … cheating … teachers’ filthy jokes in classrooms … pandering to the lusts of the flesh.” Such strictures sent Dr. Archie Turrell, principal of John Muir, and most of his faculty into a slow burn.

Every single move was classic Gramps. School officials ordered him to stop his on-campus ministry, both because they felt attacked and because he was in possible violation of California’s state education code, which forbade the teaching of religion on public school campuses. In response to their demands, he simply took it across the road, off campus, and kept at it. But Principal Turrell pursued him there, too: “He accosted me in very stern language, and told me that he would call the law. So I told him I had no fears. If the police arrested me I would preach to them in jail.” After police forced his growing audience to disperse and “invited” him into a police car to drive him away from the scene, the school suspended him—but he was back preaching from the lawn of a friendly neighbor the next week, now with “something of the attraction of a martyr.” And then this little gem: “Students were delighted with the story that Phelps had been ordered to consult the school psychologist, a middle-aged lady, and that he had turned the tables on her by ‘psychoanalyzing’ her.”
Each time I read the profile, I couldn’t help but laugh in fond recognition of the whole picture, familiar though it had happened long before even my mother existed. He wasn’t focused on the gay community in those days—LGBT rights hadn’t yet become a cultural touchstone—but this was unmistakably my grandfather: defiant, tenacious, and ultimately triumphant, calling out sin wherever he found it, fighting the powers that be to do what he believed was right, no matter what forces they brought to bear on him. Something of a martyr. Something of a hero.
Oh, how perfectly it seemed to capture my Gramps.

Five months after the profile was published, my grandfather was preaching in the chapel of the Arizona Bible Institute in Phoenix. He was introduced as “the young man from the Time magazine article,” and a considerable crowd had gathered to hear him speak—among them my grandmother, a twenty-six-year-old postgraduate music student who was working for the professor who’d invited him, Mr. Woods. She watched from the back of the room as he paced back and forth on the platform, guessing he must be thirty years old to be behaving so seriously. “It was the way he always got when he had to preach,” she told me later. “He’d get so sober it was scary. That’s the way he was.” I didn’t need to ask what she meant, because it was something that had never wavered. It was impossible to hear him speak from the pulpit without being overtaken by an almost paralyzing sense of gravity; these were matters of eternal import, and it was your never-dying soul that hung precariously in the balance. “He laid it on us for about ten or fifteen minutes. I mean, he didn’t hardly breathe … It was just shocking, it got everybody’s attention.” Mrs. Woods slipped in the back during my grandfather’s presentation and told her, “I want you to pay attention to that young man, and be nice to him.” Mrs. Woods was an Italian lady, and she was matchmaking, Gran chuckled later. But at the time, her only thought was, What young man? It didn’t occur to her that Mrs. Woods was referring to the man onstage.
They both remembered that she had an apple in her hand when he first saw her, shortly after they’d left the chapel. Biting into the apple, she practically ran right into him coming around a corner. “Are you Margie, ma’am?” he asked in his Southern drawl, and launched into another talk about how Mrs. Woods had told him all about her, how highly she thought of her. Gran was a transplant from rural Missouri, and the praise embarrassed her Midwestern sensibilities.
They saw each other several more times in the next few weeks. First at one of the school’s street meetings in downtown Phoenix, when Gran was on her way to sing at a wedding. Then Gramps gave her a ride to get her driver’s license. After that there was the New Year’s Eve party, where he said he first really noticed her, sitting at the piano with her back to the keys, singing along with all the others in an aqua-colored dress, looking radiant. When it came time for my grandfather to preach every night for two weeks at a church in nearby Glendale, she’d catch the bus to see him, and he’d drive her home afterward, taking circuitous routes so they could talk a bit more—about the Bible, mostly. “He didn’t go very long without talking about some verse … He just had Bible verses rolling out of him.” This part of the story took me aback when I first heard it; such behavior would certainly be characterized as the appearance of evil in the strict operation Gramps was running at Westboro. A boy and a girl in a car together alone, without a chaperone? For shame. When my grandmother would get home, she’d dissect the whole evening with Mrs. Woods, who told her, “Well, he’s gonna ask you to marry him when this is over.” The last church meeting was a Saturday afternoon, just before Gramps was set to head back to Mississippi for more preaching. He told her he had something for her in the glove compartment, and did she want to see what it was? She opened it up and found the ring. Many years later, when my sisters and I asked her what she thought in that moment, she said, “I didn’t have anybody—and Mrs. Woods was all excited about it. She thought it was wonderful. She was my dearest friend. I never had a friend like her. And she—and I thought that’d be just fine. That it would probably work out okay. That’s all I thought.
“I guess I was kinda scared. I mean, what was happening—I didn’t know if I wanted to or not. Well, it’s a funny feeling: you gotta make a decision, and you don’t feel like you’re prepared to make a decision. Well, I couldn’t think of any reason why not.
“I had no idea.”

My grandfather’s proposal was in January, and he returned to Arizona in time for the wedding on May 15, 1952. Less than a year later, their first child was born—a son named Fred Jr. My grandfather continued his work as a traveling preacher during the first two years of their marriage, leaving his wife and young boy at home. I never learned why they chose to leave the Southwest, but leave they did, in search of a place to settle down. Their first stop: Topeka, Kansas. Gramps took it as a sign from God that the trio had arrived in Topeka on the day that the decision in the Brown case was published—a sign that he should stay in Kansas’s capital city and work for the righteous cause of the civil rights movement. He found a steady ministerial position, too: the East Side Baptist Church was looking for a preacher to lead a new church on the other side of town—Westboro Baptist Church. In those early days, my grandfather’s fire-and-brimstone sermons were pretty typical of the era—but his preaching would grow ever more radical over the years, eventually causing East Side to cut ties with Westboro. The church’s reputation as being a proponent of hate wouldn’t develop until the launch of the picketing campaign at Gage Park, but for East Side, the breaking point came many years earlier. My grandfather’s growing certainty in the righteousness of his every belief made him unwilling to yield to another perspective on any matter.
My grandmother was seven months pregnant by the time they moved to Topeka in 1954—their second child in as many years, establishing a pattern that would continue for several more. Between 1953 and 1965, the only year without a birth was 1960. There were thirteen in all, with the youngest an outlier, born in 1968 when Gran was nearing her forty-third birthday. Fred Jr., Mark, Katherine, Margie, Shirley, Nathan, Jonathan, Rebekah, Elizabeth, Timothy, Dortha, Rachel, and Abigail. Eight girls and five boys. In addition to his ministry work, my grandfather sold insurance, vacuum cleaners, and baby strollers to support his ever-growing family. He also attended Washburn University School of Law, and by the time he graduated in 1964, he had been both editor of the law journal and captain of the moot court team.
In my teens and twenties, I would listen as my mother recounted the stories of her father’s decades of civil rights work—not just to my siblings and me, but to journalists, to students at universities and high schools across the country, even to international law enforcement executives attending the FBI National Academy at Quantico. It was a privilege to be her assistant and travel companion, to be present to hear interlocutors push for details I hadn’t thought to ask for. My mother would describe the early years of her father’s legal career, how one of his first cases out of law school had been to represent a group of black students from the University of Kansas who’d been arrested for staging a sit-in—among them Pro Football Hall of Fame legend Gale Sayers, a celebrated running back who joined the National Football League in 1965 as a first round draft pick for the Chicago Bears. She praised her father’s work ethic, the brilliance with which he’d represented his clients, how distinct and effective his courtroom strategy had been, and how intimidated opposing attorneys were to face him. She waxed lyrical about the importance of the work he did—work that came at enormous personal cost to my grandfather and his young family. At a time when Topeka was still “a Jim Crow town” where “nobody was effectuating civil rights,” a city that wasn’t about to take school integration and black equality without putting up a fight to maintain the old banners of white supremacy, the Phelps family suffered. “People would call on the phone, screaming ‘nigger lover!’ and carrying on, death threats and so forth. Over and over, we had our buildings shot up, cars shot up…” Uncle Tim, my mom’s youngest brother and a shy redheaded kid at the time, had been beaten up more than once at school and as he’d walked home.
None of it moved my grandfather, not the violence or threats of violence, not the backlash, not the unrelenting opposition from the legal community. None of it moved him an inch off his mark. In his view, racism was the great sin of society during that part of his life, and I imagine he quoted the same verses to steel himself in the face of that opposition as he did later, during our fight against LGBT rights: Behold, I have made thy face strong against their faces, and thy forehead strong against their foreheads. As an adamant harder than flint have I made thy forehead: fear them not, neither be dismayed at their looks. Not only did he continue that work himself for more than two decades, but he required that my mother and her siblings join him, each one as soon as they were able—and whether they liked it or not. By the late 1980s, he had received the Omaha Mayor’s Special Recognition Award, an award from the Greater Kansas City Chapter of Blacks in Government, and another from the Bonner Springs chapter of the NAACP for his “undauntedness” and his “steely determination for justice during his tenure as a civil rights attorney.”
My father first got a camcorder back in 1988 so he could film home movies: our bedtime stories, the cookie-making operations he’d lead in Mom’s absence, and enthusiastic renditions of “I’m a Little Teapot” and Winnie-the-Pooh Sing-Alongs. Among the very earliest of that footage is a speech my grandfather gave on April 4, 1988, at an event sponsored by the Kansas Committee to Free Southern Africa. Organized to oppose apartheid in South Africa, the event took place at a local black church and featured remarks by a county commissioner, the president of the Topeka Public Schools board of education, the state treasurer, Topeka’s deputy mayor, a state representative, and the Kansas Attorney General. When Gramps approached the podium, he brought with him a copy of the United States Reports, Volume 60, containing the opinion passed down by the U.S. Supreme Court in the infamous Dred Scott case, which held that Americans of African descent, whether free or slave, were not American citizens and as such could not claim rights guaranteed to citizens. My grandfather spoke eloquently against the “de facto bondage” of blacks in South Africa, and of the moral outrage of the white supremacy espoused in the Dred Scott decision. He quoted the opinion at some length, which described blacks as “so far inferior that they had no rights which the white man was bound to respect.” Full of righteous indignation, my grandfather’s voice reached its crescendo as he read the Court’s assertion that “the negro might justly and lawfully be reduced to slavery for his benefit.” He could hardly contain his shame and disgust for the black-robed justices who’d written such words. “Eighty-four years after Lord Mansfield, with the stroke of his pen, set all the blacks in England free, we’re over here like some stone-age barbarians writin’ our cockeyed Supreme Court opinions about black people—you oughta know this!”
Decades later, CNN would interview leaders in the black community who’d known my grandfather during his days as a civil rights attorney:

Jack Alexander, a Topeka native and civil rights activist, says the Brown decision opened the door for discrimination suits. Phelps would take cases in the 1960s that other lawyers, black and white, wouldn’t touch, he says. “Back in that era, most black attorneys were busy trying to make a living,” says Alexander, who became the first black elected in the city of Topeka, as a member of the Topeka City Commission. “They couldn’t take those cases on the chance they wouldn’t get paid. But Fred was taking those cases.” Phelps was so successful that he became the first lawyer blacks would call when they thought they were being discriminated against, says the NAACP’s [Rev. Ben] Scott.

The more details I learned of the first wave of my grandfather’s war on the city of Topeka, the more my heart swelled with pride for him and for our family. This was our legacy. In spite of all the vicious words spoken against us, there could be no question as to the twin evils of racial discrimination and white supremacy. There could be no question that my family had been on the noble side of that dispute. History had proved us right. That Topekans would hate us for it seemed like dispositive evidence of just how morally bankrupt our city truly was.

This glowing portrait of my family, courageously taking up arms in the battle against evil, was first called into question by my unwitting adversaries online. I was thirteen when the Internet first became part of my daily life, and one of my favorite things to do around this time was to argue Bible doctrines with strangers in the chat room on GodHatesFags.com—at least until I’d be unceremoniously kicked offline by our temperamental dial-up connection. The Topeka Capital Journal website was another frequent destination, as it maintained now-defunct message boards where I could pose as an objective observer and mount anonymous defenses of Westboro.
I learned early to ignore the casual insults they tossed around—“hateful,” “evil,” “monsters,” “stupid”—for the simple fact that I knew my family. Not only did these descriptors fail to capture the essence of the people I knew and loved, they were diametrically opposed to it. Nearly all of the adults in my orbit were college graduates, many with postgraduate degrees in law, business, and public administration. Whether they chose to pursue work in health care, corrections, or information technology, their careers flourished. They were natural comedians, clever and creative, and I’d often laugh myself to tears listening to outrageous stories they’d spin and parodies they’d write. My daily existence was a living testimony against the slanders hurled at my family, and made it easy to dismiss the accusers as liars who could not be trusted in any context.
Shortly after I emerged on the message boards at thirteen, references to my grandfather’s expulsion from the courts began to crop up. He hadn’t stopped practicing law because he’d retired, my opponents said; he’d been disbarred. I knew it to be true, but I’d always heard his disbarment dismissed as an unjustified punishment, because “these people hated us.” I paid the accusers no mind at first, but it made me uneasy: disbarment wasn’t a matter of unsubstantiated opinion, but a verifiable fact. They started to lay out the case that cost my grandfather his license in 1979: that he had flown into a rage when a court reporter failed to have a transcript ready for him in time; that he had sued her in a frivolous lawsuit demanding $22,000 in damages; and that he had abused her on the witness stand, badgering her for days on end. When they began quoting from the disbarment proceedings, I couldn’t ignore it any longer: “The seriousness of the present case … leads this court to the conclusion that [Fred Phelps] has little regard for the ethics of his profession.” I needed to find out the facts so that I could learn how to respond to these allegations—something more than “everyone just hates us.” I went to my mother in her capacity as the keeper of our collective history, an informal role she played in the church because of her punctilious mind, unparalleled memory, and uniquely close relationship with Gramps. She would have the answer for me.
Gramps had been disbarred, my mother told me, but it was in retaliation for his civil rights work—not for any actual transgression on his part. “Those people hated us for that work. The courts hated us, the businesses hated us, all because we won those big verdicts. We were holdin’ their feet to the fire in those discrimination cases, and they weren’t gonna get a free pass on any of their misdeeds. They could hardly be civil to us, they hated us so badly.” Yes, I pressed, but what about the court reporter? “Hon, do you think your Gramps is crazy? It wasn’t just because that woman was ‘late with a transcript.’ It was a strategic move on her part, delaying that transcript. It was an essential piece of evidence in a case, and her deliberate refusal to produce it on time was to ensure that we missed the deadline to file. There are all kinds of ways for people to screw you over in the courts with technicalities like that, and that’s exactly what she was doin’.” My mother explained that it wasn’t just our word against the court’s, either. Monroe Friedman, one of the nation’s leading experts in legal ethics, had written a dissertation in support of my grandfather, summarized in the Wichita Eagle-Beacon in 1983:

In a long dissertation filed in federal court in support of Phelps, Monroe Friedman, law professor and former dean of Hofstra University Law School, said, “It was as clear to me as could be that the kind of conduct that Fred Phelps was accused of is commonplace among the bar, that it is proper conduct, and that it would never be subjected to a disciplinary attack unless there was some other motive.”
Friedman said the motive is the nature of Phelps’ clientele.
“It has become professionally dangerous for a lawyer to be involved in representing poor people and in representing unpopular clients and unpopular cases,” he said.

Still, my mother wasn’t finished. She pointed out that perhaps the clearest indicator of all that her father’s disbarment had been a sham was the fact that the federal court had refused to disbar him. “Normally, if you’ve got some ethics violation and the state court disbars you for it, the federal court just rubber-stamps it, and kicks you out of their courts, too. They wouldn’t do that to Gramps. They said he hadn’t done anything worthy of disbarment, and he kept practicing in the federal courts for another ten years.”
My mother didn’t ask where I’d discovered the accusations I’d presented to her, likely assuming they’d come from our daily pickets—eight years in and still going strong. I didn’t volunteer their source, either. I was afraid she’d tell me not to waste time arguing with Topeka’s riffraff on the Internet, and I didn’t want to stop. I thought engaging with people was important, that it was a perfect opportunity to “maintain and defend pure Gospel truth,” like my grandfather was always encouraging us to do. He preached extensively about the believer’s duty to be able by sound doctrine both to exhort and to convince the gainsayers. “Convince means confute!” he would say. “It means to overwhelm them with sound arguments, logic, and evidence, to prove the folly of their position.” I knew I would need to practice if I wanted to join Gramps in declaring with the Apostle Paul, I am set for the defence of the gospel.

Hunched over the keys of the living room computer, I continued to pore over the message boards whenever I had a spare moment. The accusations kept coming. One impugned my grandfather’s motives in battling racism, saying his goals were not moral but financial, that he only represented blacks because he could make money off of them: exploitation of the black cause masquerading as noble sacrifice. “I made a lot of money,” my grandfather told the Capital Journal, “I have to admit that.” I couldn’t accept this view. I’d heard Gramps preach against racism with the same venom he employed against gays, and it was clear that he saw his civil rights work in the same way he saw our daily picketing—as a moral imperative. I noted a similar accusation people made about our protesting, too, the insistence that the true heart of Westboro was an elaborate scheme to make money. We would provoke onlookers into assaulting us on the picket line, they proffered, and then we would sue both our attackers and the police for failing to protect us. Such a scenario never played out even a single time, but that never stopped people from believing it was true. It struck me that this desire to exchange a financial motive for an ideological one was a convenient evasion of a distressing truth: it was easier to dismiss our stated intentions than to acknowledge that people who were otherwise bright and well-intentioned could believe and behave as we did as members of Westboro.
I didn’t want to bring too many of these Internet accusations to my mother, so I reasoned with myself about whether the money my grandfather had earned devalued his civil rights work. Didn’t my grandparents have thirteen children to support? Was it wrong for him to try to make a good living for them? And hadn’t he represented many people who couldn’t pay him at all? If he hadn’t made money on the cases he won, he couldn’t have afforded to represent those who didn’t have money. Was justice only for the rich? Defend the poor and fatherless: do justice to the afflicted and needy. Deliver the poor and needy: rid them out of the hand of the wicked. This allegation, too, was a nonstarter for me.
But there was another that nearly proved ruinous.
Rumors of extreme child abuse had filtered in and out of my awareness for almost as many years as I had memories. Their source: the two uncles whom I had never met, Mark and Nate. I knew to find them odious and repugnant from the way my mother and her siblings spoke of them, even when ostensibly paying them a compliment. “Those two boys were very smart, probably smarter than many of us who’re still here—but they thought they were smarter than God.” My aunt’s voice was loaded with derision. “They’re just rebels, and that’s all there is to it.” The dismissal was final, the door to discussion firmly shut.
Except it wasn’t. The rumors resurfaced time and again, and had even been printed in a series of articles the Capital Journal had published about my grandfather in 1994: “Hate for the Love of God.” Reporters Steve Fry and Joe Taschler had done extensive research into my grandfather’s past, looking up childhood friends and neighbors, interviewing classmates, and chronicling the evolution of the man who had laid siege to the city of Topeka with more than three years of daily protesting against all who crossed him. They had also found his estranged sons, then living in California. Mark and Nate described brutal violence: beatings that lasted for hours as my grandfather yelled and cursed them, the heavy leather straps and a mattock handle he used, bloodcurdling screams, bruises on top of bruises that would split open their skin. The eerie joy he took at their pain, grinning at the wounds he had caused. There were so many examples, so many specifics.
Publicly, my mom and her siblings always vehemently denied the stories told by their estranged brothers: no, they had not been abused—only spanked. Disciplined. Their brothers were just angry because they hated God. Because they wanted to fornicate and commit adultery and live as they pleased. Those two boys were throwing a public hissy fit because they didn’t want to obey their father or the Lord, and they didn’t want anyone to interfere with their disobedience. Incredulity would creep into the voices of reporters as they somberly repeated my uncles’ allegations for comment: Was my mother really going to suggest that every one of her brothers’ stories was entirely exaggerated? Was she going to deny that there had been any abuse at all?
She was, indeed. Her siblings would deny it, as well, though they avoided addressing it whenever possible. They’d laugh out loud at the reporter’s queries and ask rhetorical questions intended to shame him for his lack of insight: Would nine of the thirteen Phelps children have remained at Westboro if they’d been subjected to savage abuse? How was it that the loyal children were all so well-educated and professionally accomplished—meanwhile, Nathan had dropped out of school and was driving a cab for a living? My grandfather also dismissed their charges, telling the Capital Journal, “Hardly a word of truth to that stuff. Those boys didn’t want to stay in this church. It was too hard. They took up with girls they liked, and the last thing them girls was gonna do was come into this church. These boys wanted to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season. I can’t blame them. I just feel sorry for them that they’re not bound for the promised land.”
At home, other details painted a more complicated picture. My mother and her siblings dodged the word “abuse,” and always maintained that Mark and Nathan were liars—but even at thirteen, I recognized the obfuscation. I knew my uncles could be “liars” (technically, weren’t we all liars?), and still be telling the truth on this question. My grandfather had nearly always been gentle and sweet to me, and I would forever strive to earn his approval. I found such joy in being his go-to tech assistant, my phone number written on a Post-it and taped to his computer screen. At his slightest erroneous mouse click, I’d take off running through the backyard, in the church’s west door, up the stairs, and into his office. Once, when I was demonstrating the correct keystrokes to save his work, he showed me the icon he clicked—“that little button,” he called it—to accomplish the same thing. We looked at the icon together for a second, and I said, “It’s actually an old floppy disc.” Gramps laughed. “That sounds like what I feel! An old, floppy, disc.” We cracked up, and as always, he gave me a hug and a kiss on the cheek to see me out. “I think I’ll take that as my new nickname!” he declared. For the work I did for the ministry, for my aptitude in memorizing and defending church doctrines, and for my increasingly loud and zealous voice for Westboro in the media, I had my grandfather’s approval, and he liberally showed me his love and praise. “I just love all that good work you do, sug’. I love it, I love it, I love it! You learned how to put together a sentence like that from your ol’ Gramps, didn’tcha? Ha!” That little twinkle in his eye when he’d tease us, and then toss his head back and chuckle …
But growing up, I was also a bit afraid of him, of what would happen if I stepped out of line. The few times I gave him occasion to be dissatisfied with me—as when I failed to play a hymn at the correct tempo the single time I was accompanist at our Sunday church service—he berated me without pity, his harsh temper provoked at the slightest displeasure. The fear I had was also passed down by my parents’ generation, by the way they spoke of anything that might upset or disappoint my grandfather: in hushed tones with intense strategizing about the best way to reveal a problem to him. It was not uncommon to hear, “Stay clear, Daddy’s throwing one of his fits again!”
And then there was my mother. Sometimes she seemed exhausted just thinking about the years growing up with her father. The Phelps children spent long days at school, followed by hours of selling boxes of candy on the streets of Topeka, Kansas City, Wichita, to support the family and the church, followed by a daily ten-mile run. My grandfather had found the running program on the back of a Wheaties box and forced all his children to join him in following it—even the ones in elementary school. When he decided they would start training for marathons, their Saturday mileage increased to twenty-six. “His motto has always been, ‘If a little’s good, a lot’s better.’ No moderation, always to the extreme,” my mother told me more than once. When they ran the Heart of America marathon in Columbia, Missouri, my uncle Tim was the youngest to compete. He’d turned seven just a few weeks before the race. It took him seven hours to finish. Runner’s World thought it was a great story and published it in their November 1970 issue, which hung proudly on the wall of the church office next to the Time profile. “We were too young to be doin’ that—sellin’ candy and runnin’ like that,” my mom would say. “Too damn young. He shouldn’t have had us out there like that, and that’s all there is to it. Nothin’ to do about it now, though.”
It was in the past. Gramps didn’t do that anymore.
Such was the essence of the position my mother took when I came to her one day in tears of outrage and despair: my sleuthing on the message boards had led me to a book. It had been referenced a few dozen times before my curiosity got the better of me. I knew it was full of lies, per my parents. They explained that even the Capital Journal—certainly no friend of ours—had refused to print what they referred to as an “agenda-driven” manuscript. The ex-intern who’d authored the book had been fired by the newspaper “as a result of our inability to place any reliance on his judgment and his work product. His actions as an employee here were unprofessional and ethically questionable.” I clicked the link and began to read.
An hour later, wailing with an anguish the likes of which I’d never known, I stormed out of the living room and into my mother’s office. She jumped out of her chair and rushed over. “Is it true?!” I demanded, hardly able to force my mouth to form words around the sobs, doubling over as I folded myself into her arms. This was not a tone I ever took with my mother, but I had no control. I had not asked her about all the accusations I’d found on those message boards. I needed to ask her about this.
“Is what true?! Is what true?!”
“Gran!” I squalled. The writer’s detailing of my grandfather’s child abuse had made me gasp as I read, yet I’d managed to hold on to the lifeline that this was not a trustworthy account. But when I read of my six-foot-three Gramps going after my tiny, gentle Gran decades earlier—punching her, beating her with heavy implements, dislocating her shoulder by throwing her down the stairs, and cutting her hair to the scalp because she wasn’t sufficiently in subjection to him—I instantly came apart. This was a reality I could not bear to consider. It contradicted everything I knew about my faith and my family, everything I needed to believe. That we were righteous. That we were loving. That we were the good guys.
The truth was that my grandfather’s remarkable lack of self-restraint couldn’t help but extend to his discipline. And despite all the practice I had in denying it, I knew it. I had known only echoes of Gramps’s rage through my mother, but the intensity of even those echoes had been a frequent source of terror for my siblings and me—the way it transformed the features of my mother, twisting them into something sharp and menacing and filled with violence. I pushed away the memories of my five-year-old self, the nightmares that ensued when I failed to learn the week’s piano lesson. Withhold not correction from the child: for if thou beatest him with the rod, he shall not die. Thou shalt beat him with the rod, and shalt deliver his soul from hell. I’d cry out hysterically with each stroke of the wooden paddle until she finally stopped, but when I’d return to the piano bench a blubbering wreck, Mom wouldn’t leave me to work. Instead she’d slam the paddle down on the piano top and sit down next to me. “Go,” she would snarl, though I was shaking and could hardly see the music through tears. Chasten thy son while there is hope, and let not thy soul spare for his crying. There was no way to concentrate with her beside me, and yet she would sit for the next hour, yelling, jabbing the beat into my shoulder, yanking me up for another spanking every few minutes, the force of the blows rising with her ire. More discordant notes would ring out when she smacked the tops of my hands, smashing my little fingers into the keys. He that spareth his rod hateth his son: but he that loveth him chasteneth him betimes.
My mother rarely mentioned her father’s abuse directly, but it was apparent nonetheless. It was in her tone when she spoke of her father “always going too far. His policy was to beat first and ask questions later.” It was in her despair when she would recall being “at—his—mercy!” It was in the way she responded to the howls of her children as she disciplined us: “These kids don’t know how good they have it!” Her outrage at our distress made it clear that whatever she was doing to us wasn’t even in the same league as what her father had done to her and her siblings. The Bible required strict discipline, but in her mind, she was delivering a more moderate version to my siblings and me. My mother didn’t tell me until I was twenty-five—almost surely because of the way I responded to the discovery of this book at thirteen—that her father had done permanent injury to her. She would have chronic pain for the rest of her life.
“Stop it, stop it!” she pleaded, holding on to me. “No, it’s not true! And even if it were, you don’t think he’s doing that stuff today, do ya?!”
“No,” I admitted. I needed to let myself be comforted. I needed her to convince me that it wasn’t true.
“And if it were true, d’you think it’d be right to keep beatin’ a guy up for old sins?” Of course it wasn’t. We believed in repentance and forgiveness. If a person changed, their past had no bearing on the present. For I will be merciful to their unrighteousness, and their sins and their iniquities will I remember no more. “I don’t want you reading that stuff anymore! There’s no value in it! Go shut that down, and don’t be goin’ back to it.” I was only too relieved to let her direct me away from these thoughts, because pressing at the edge of my consciousness was an uncomfortable parallel: between my grandfather’s physical brutality on the one hand, and the way our church responded to the suffering of outsiders on the other. Our joy at their demise. Our delight at their destruction. I took my leave of this line of thought and accepted the shield of my mother’s instruction, because I needed to believe that our ministry had not been influenced by the pathologies of a human being. I needed to see that Westboro’s monopoly on truth would continue to stand. I needed to know that the past had no bearing on the present.
I could never bring myself to ask my mother about one of my earliest memories of her. In my child mind, I’m alone in the living room, playing with blocks on the floor. Suddenly I’m looking up across the room at Mom and her twenty-something sister Dortha—Dottie, we called her—by the half wall with the wooden columns to the ceiling. They’re screaming at each other, and Mom grabs Dottie by the hair and yanks hard. She grabs Dottie’s arm and digs long fingernails into her flesh. I know it hurts, because she does it to me when I misbehave. Four little crescent moons. This is the beginning.
This was how you taught obedience. Until fear of God replaced fear of pain, this was how you learned obedience.
Come, ye children, hearken unto me: I will teach you the fear of the Lord.

My grandfather lost his license to practice law in federal court in February 1989. My mother could give me a detailed explanation of the state court disbarment from ten years earlier, complete with objective legal experts to support her conclusions, but I never understood how she rationalized the “nine-judge complaint” that came close to decimating the Phelps-Chartered law firm—nothing beyond “These people were always coming after us. They hated us.” She dismissed the charges filed against seven of the firm’s attorneys as “our annual Disbarment Rites of Spring,” as she and her siblings had begun to call them: trumped-up charges filed with the goal of shutting down our family’s civil rights work. In the disciplinary complaint, nine senior federal judges charged that my grandfather, my mother, and five of my aunts and uncles had made false accusations against them, and that they all deserved to be disbarred. A prolonged investigation ensued, one that found that Phelps-Chartered lawyers had violated the Code of Professional Responsibility. More than three years after the complaint was filed, my grandfather surrendered his license in exchange for the federal judges allowing my mother, aunts, and uncles to continue practicing in the federal courts. Nearly a decade later, my Gramps would commemorate the death of one of those nine judges in his Sunday sermon—a celebration of the murder-suicide in which the judge and his wife were both found dead, his courthouse revolver on the bed between them. And shall not God avenge his own elect, which cry day and night unto him? I tell you that he will avenge them speedily.
Many years later, I would email to ask my aunt Dottie about the disciplinary complaint that finally ended my grandfather’s legal career. I hadn’t seen her since the incident I’d witnessed in my living room at age four, my only childhood memory of her being the moment she chose to leave Westboro forever. I wasn’t sure I could trust her. Reading her account of those days, the first thing that leapt out at me was the timeline—a connection I had missed all my life. Gramps had surrendered his law license in the spring of 1989, the end of his decades of successful and acclaimed civil rights work. At nearly sixty years old, he was suddenly and unwillingly facing an enormous vacuum in his life—and just a few months later, the biking incident at Gage Park with my brother Josh and the two men emerging from the bushes.
The end of one crusade leading directly into the beginning of another.
Dottie also asserted that her father’s removal from the federal court was justified, recounting a scene of deliberate lies and fabrication of evidence that I found difficult to imagine. As I pondered her assertions for a moment, trying to determine whether my family was capable of such things, an uncomfortable memory surfaced.
In my twenties, my mother and her siblings agreed to be interviewed once more on the subject of their father’s abuse, but only because it would get Westboro a platform on the Oprah Winfrey Network, a show hosted by Rosie O’Donnell. My uncle Nate had been interviewed, and the producers wanted to give us an opportunity to respond to his claims. Stomach twisting, I watched the interview the day it was published, expecting my family to cleverly evade the grisly accusations, to tell selective truths, to employ misdirection. These were all deceptive tactics, I knew, but I was consoled by the fact that they weren’t outright lies. The truth was important to me—it was our defense against the never-ending attacks that came at us every day—and I anxiously wondered what Nate was going to say and just how my family would be able to respond honestly without hurting the church.
The answer was that they couldn’t. There sat my mother, four aunts, and two uncles—all in their forties and fifties by this point—giggling at the reporter’s grim questions, all pretending they had no idea what Nathan could possibly be referring to. “I don’t even know what a barber strap is!” said one incredulously. “Does he have a picture or something, so that we might know what he’s talking about?” another derided. “Nate always had an overactive imagination.” The smugness and condescension stunned me. The footage went on for nearly twenty minutes, and it was painful to watch. “There wasn’t any physical abuse, just forget that!” “They used to call it spanking!” As if it were all just a confusion of terms.
“Did you feel emotionally abused as a child?” the producer asked quietly. They erupted in laughter.
“Do you mean by Nathan?”
They went on at length about Nathan’s shortcomings as a child—“disruptive, destructive, distressing”—and I sat there mouth agape at the double standard. My family would never stop harping on the sins of Nathan’s youth, but would lay none of the responsibility at the feet of their father. Nate was to be held forever accountable for not conforming, for not just learning to fear and obey the way that they had all learned to. My mom and her siblings were holding Nate to account for the chaotic state of their childhood home—but they never would with Gramps.
Because Gramps had stayed. And Nate had left.
A vexing thought began to take hold. As members of Westboro, we behaved as if everyone in all the world were accountable to us, as if they all were steadfastly bound to obey our preaching—because we were the only ones who knew the true meaning of God’s Word. Presidents and kings, judges and governors, Princess Diana and Mother Teresa—all were subject to our understanding and our judgment. And all the while, we ourselves were accountable to no one outside our fences. But he that is spiritual judgeth all things, yet he himself is judged of no man. For who hath known the mind of the Lord, that he may instruct him? But we have the mind of Christ. Who would have the audacity to contradict the mind of Christ?
Nathan had dared to question the judgment of the church, and he had faced our collective wrath as a result. The facts were in Nate’s story, but we said he was fabricating it all in order to make a name for himself off of the church. “But go ahead and write some books and whatnot,” one of my uncles scoffed. “We don’t really care.” We dismissed Nathan as being driven by the same pecuniary motive people falsely assigned to us, and for partly the same reason: to avoid facing an uncomfortable truth, a blurring of the line between the good guys and the bad. So we called the truth a lie and rewrote history—as though it were in our power to dictate reality so long as it was in the church’s judgment and interest. So long as we all held the line, no one could prevail against us.
We were the Jacobs. We were always under Satan’s attack. We had to protect ourselves.
I was beginning to see that our first loyalty was not to the truth but to the church. That for us, the church was the truth, and disloyalty was the only sin unforgivable. This was the true Westboro legacy.
I walked away from the video and pushed the troubling thoughts away, knowing without thinking that Nate would go away at the end of this news cycle and something else would take his place. I wouldn’t have to think about it anymore. I instinctively held on to the hope that had carried me through all the storms we’d weathered at Westboro.
As long as I stayed and did what I was told—as long as I believed—everything would turn out okay.




