






7. Ye Shall Be Judged

It wasn’t just in my mind. Grace was avoiding me.
Or at least, she was avoiding being alone with me. She was afraid. Each time it seemed we would have a chance to speak in private, she made other plans—heading off to read to our little brothers after Bible study in the evenings, or spending her lunch break in the kitchen instead of coming up to my bedroom. If I was going to the evening pickets, she would find a reason to stay home. If I was stuck working in the office, she’d grab a sign bag and volunteer to take the boys. I was in a constant state of attempting to mask my frantic anguish—so many people around, always; surely they could see the sedition in my thoughts?—and the panic was exacerbated by the knowledge that Grace could turn me in at any time. Only when we were together did I have any sense of relief that she wasn’t reporting me at that very moment.
Why hadn’t I left immediately?
It was C.G. who’d told me to slow down. When I re-installed Words With Friends and broached the subject of leaving the church, he warned me that this was not a decision I could make in an instant. If my existential crisis was just the result of a few squabbles with the new church leadership—if I still believed most of what I had been preaching for decades—then I would not find the world a hospitable place. Knowing how dedicated I’d been, he said I should think it through. That I needed to be certain. I saw the wisdom in C.G.’s advice and would wait to make my decision until I knew for sure.
Still, there were a few things I was certain about, even in those earliest days:
I would not be attending any more funeral protests.
When my family prostrated ourselves after evening Bible readings, my prayers would no longer include curses for our enemies.
I would not be talking to the media, if I could possibly avoid it—there were too many land mines now, and if a reporter stumbled upon one, I knew I wouldn’t be able to hide my misgivings.
And I would not hold any signs that I didn’t believe, or preach anything that I didn’t think was true.
The perpetual motion of the church never ceased, and outwardly I was still completely enmeshed in the flurry of activities that kept Westboro constantly in the news—but inwardly, my doubts were multiplying. For the first time in my life, I was allowing myself to ponder ideas that I had always instinctively shoved into the darkest corners of my mind. I felt like I was losing my grip on reality, my thoughts boomeranging back and forth between two extremes: (1) that Westboro was fundamentally right and that my mind was rebelling against God at Satan’s direction, and (2) that the truths we held to be self-evident were entirely questionable, odious, and destructive—both for us and for the people we’d been accosting on the streets for more than two decades. I became consumed with questions, assaulted by every passing doubt I’d ever had. It had only been a few days since I’d been painting with Grace in that basement, but troublesome memories now seemed to appear in every quiet moment. I couldn’t escape them.
Sitting at my grandfather’s computer in the church library—typing Bible verses for one of his sermons—I flashed back to a drive to school one afternoon when I was in college. It was one of the first warm days that spring, and the windows were down, breeze ruffling my hair as I mulled over a point of doctrine. I was taking a logic course that semester, and as I pondered the argument, I became vaguely unnerved. We believed all outsiders hated us. If they said they hated us, we believed them. If they said they loved us, we believed they were either lying or delusional, and nothing could persuade us otherwise. I began to see that for many of our beliefs, there was absolutely no evidence that could be introduced to us that would cause us to change our minds. Unfalsifiable. My brows stitched together as I stepped out of the car—and then I had grabbed my bag, never to return to the question again.
Folding laundry with my four youngest brothers outside the upstairs laundry room, I was abruptly transported back to my pew one Sunday morning a few years earlier. My grandfather was preaching about Hell again, expounding eloquently on what it entailed. The same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God … and he shall be tormented with fire and brimstone in the presence of the holy angels, and in the presence of the Lamb: And the smoke of their torment ascendeth up for ever and ever: and they have no rest day nor night. In Hell, my grandfather explained, the damned would each in turn be put on trial: every wrong thought and word and deed that they had ever committed would be adjudicated in exhaustive detail. And the adjudicators? The people in Heaven. Each one of the Saints of God would have a caseload, as it were, personally condemning the reprobates to an eternity of agony and rejoicing at their endless suffering. It was a very real and present fear that my grandfather elicited with his detailed descriptions of torment—but the idea had been abstract to me until that moment. As I listened to my grandfather’s words, it suddenly occurred to me to consider Heaven and Hell in practical terms: I would be condemning people to torture? And I would be happy about it? I couldn’t even watch a torture scene in a film without jumping out of my seat, overcome with outrage, disgust, and revulsion that anyone could be capable of visiting such horror on a living, breathing human being. I didn’t think I could condemn people to torture, and sitting in my pew that day, I’d wondered if there was something wrong with me. No, the thought resounded now. I picked up a stack of bath towels and handed them to my brother. If Hell is real, then God is evil. Terrified, I mentally backtracked. Maybe.
Walking with Grace and our nieces to the park that weekend, my thoughts veered to a letter to the editor published by the local newspaper when I was sixteen. It bore my signature, but my aunt Margie had written it. Though I had agreed with every word, there was one part that rang strongly discordant in my mind: “I’ve watched carefully and listened to my grandfather and those who oppose him. My grandfather’s Bible-preaching is more agreeable to my heart.” We never appealed to our own thoughts or feelings as reliable evidence of truth, and we routinely disparaged others for doing so. The Bible was true because it was true, regardless of how I—or anyone else—felt about it or any of its teachings. This had been a theme of my life, oft-repeated by my mother: The heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked: who can know it? There was always urgent warning in my mother’s voice when she quoted this passage: we could not trust our hearts. Our feelings would lead us astray. Why had Margie written that sentence? I’d been almost physically repulsed by it, and watching my nieces bound across the field as we arrived at the park, I was finally able to pinpoint why: my sixteen-year-old self had started to recognize the contradiction. We used our hearts to authenticate the moral truth of the Bible—the same Bible that told us our hearts were deceitful. I shook my head as I realized that all we had was our hearts. In writing that sentence, Margie had unwittingly betrayed that at bottom—resting beneath all the chapters and verses that we’d spent years quoting and memorizing—the foundation of it all was a belief that our hearts had led us true when they told us the Bible was the answer.
Our unreliable, desperately wicked, deceitful hearts.

The few weeks following that Fourth of July were the longest I’d ever lived. Whenever Grace couldn’t avoid being alone with me, our conversations followed a predictable pattern. I would attempt to dissect the problems at Westboro, and she would nod in agreement at my analysis—but then she would insist on addressing the consequences that I could not bear to consider. Our family. How worthless our lives would be without them. The pathetic emptiness of a life without this divine purpose. And eternity in Hell. These were unfathomably horrifying, but I could not let go of the failures of Scripture and logic that I now saw so clearly in the church. How could we go on living like this?
But how could we live outside of this?
Whether we stayed or left, our prospects were bleak.
There was no containing the despair and devastation that seized my body each time I imagined leaving, so Grace and I resolved not to think about it unless we had the space to mourn without an audience. She was still avoidant and seemed afraid of me, but we both knew that public displays of unhappiness would raise suspicion in a hurry—accusations of discontentment and murmuring against God—and there was still so much to think through. When Grace and I were apart, we discussed our doubts by text messages that we deleted shortly after sending. We agreed that I would keep screenshots of the conversations so that we could examine them later, but that I would transfer them to a hidden folder on my computer in case my parents came to examine my phone. I had never been subjected to such scrutiny, but others had—and if the request was made, it couldn’t be denied without major trouble. I hated the deception, but I knew that regardless of what we decided, we needed to be as sure about it as we could be.
For his part, C.G. was full of gentle, sometimes pointed questions. He was trying to discern what was happening in my mind, and since my thoughts were swinging back and forth like a pendulum, I was grateful for his calming influence. Explaining myself helped me to focus. It gave me something to hold on to.

C.G.: What do you believe?
MEGAN: I can’t call my whole life a waste. I’ve learned so very much. And I never would have met you if I weren’t me. I really believed those things, and there really is a lot of good in it—about caring and looking out for people. These are good people. I wonder if I’ll be able to stand without their support.
I’ve thought before, “Who cares?” re: whether someone is gay. It was a knee-jerk response, and I’d put the kibosh on it. I’m not sure what all I believe. I’m working on it.
C.G.: This doesn’t seem real. You must understand that.
MEGAN: Which part? I know, though.
C.G.: All of it. I’m watching True Blood right now, and, as you know, “God Hates Fangs.” That’s you. That’s crazy.
I know you from YouTube and your voice there is different from the one I hear when I read your words. It’s all crazy. You aren’t real to people. You’re an idea.
And what about Bekah? She just stays there and lives happily ever after?

Lying in the dark late at night, tucked away with phone in hand, I pondered C.G.’s questions and tried to make sense of them. I thought about Bekah. I had always seen myself as much more like her than like Grace—far more willing to yield than to challenge—and I wondered again how I had become so unruly. The elders weren’t the first major transition in the church, nor were my mother and sister the first close loved ones targeted for church discipline. In the past, no matter how much I initially doubted a position taken by the church, their justifications always made sense eventually. Could I even recall the last time Bekah and I were completely in sync in this shared tendency? Certainly before Twitter, I knew.


MEGAN: Bekah is just like I was not so very long ago. It will be horrible, and she will take it so hard, and she will blame herself. She is so tender-hearted. I love her so.
C.G.: Why can’t you get her out, too?


I clicked my screen off and squeezed my eyes shut, willing myself not to cry. Exhausted of tears. My bedroom suddenly felt stifling, and I opened the window in search of a breeze. How to explain to him? I lay back down and stared at the ceiling, now bathed in the orange light of the streetlamp outside.


MEGAN: She wouldn’t come. She just wouldn’t. As ardently as I fought you, she would fight any notion that this isn’t the way. She would be scared of me and for me and would enlist the aid of the whole church to recover me (before I left, I mean). She is exactly where I was—but she is less confident in herself and therefore even more willing to distrust her own thoughts and judgments. I wish she would leave—and maybe she will one day. But I don’t think it will be soon.
Life is short. And getting shorter all the time.
C.G.: Then show empathy for people rather than mocking them.
This isn’t my place. At least not tonight. Good night, sweet, confused girl.
MEGAN: I’d be offended, except I know: you only know I want to leave, but not all the reasons. One reason: it does not make me happy to see people killed or starving or maimed. I don’t want to mock them; I want to help them.
It is your place. You’re a friend. Sleep well.



Between Grace, C.G., and the news, I was presented with fresh opportunities to stew in my confusion and despair daily. Grace was stewing, too, sending me text messages fretting about Hell as she sat at her desk doing data entry work downtown. As I struggled to answer my sister’s pressing questions about our eternal fate, my thoughts returned to Margie’s letter to the editor—that contradiction of relying on our hearts when our hearts were evil. It had not occurred to me to see that paradox to its logical conclusion, but now a new question dawned on me:
What if the Bible wasn’t the literal and infallible word of God?
At home in my bedroom, I froze. This was the sine qua non of our belief system, the foundational truth of the life I had led since I was capable of conscious thought. I was surprised at how noiselessly it shattered.
Not a single breath passed before my mind pulled forth a Bible story that had rankled me since the first time my mother read it to my siblings and me when I was a little girl.
In the book of Judges, the final three chapters tell the tale of a Levite and his concubine. We are not told their names—only that she played the whore against him, and retreated to her father’s house in the city of Bethlehem. There she remained for four months, until her husband went after her, to speak friendly unto her, and to bring her home again. By the repeated entreaties of his father-in-law, the man was convinced to stay and eat and make merry for several days. The fifth day arrived, and as they prepared to leave that afternoon, the woman’s father pressed him again: Behold, now the day draweth toward evening, I pray you tarry all night. But the man would not. He and his concubine and his servant departed, though it was too late in the day to make it home by nightfall.
That evening, rather than spend the night in a city of strangers, the Levite decided their group would press on to the city of Gibeah, of the tribe of Benjamin. They arrived just after sunset. When an old man saw them preparing to sleep in a street of the city, he drew near. “Let all thy wants lie upon me; only lodge not in the street,” he warned them. The old man brought them into his house to care for them and their animals.
As they were making their hearts merry, the men of the city surrounded the house, beating at the door and calling out to the old man: they wanted to rape the Levite. “Bring forth the man that came into thine house, that we may know him.”
The old man begged them not to do such a thing: “Behold, here is my daughter a maiden, and his concubine; them will I bring out now, and humble ye them, and do what seemeth good unto you: but unto this man do not so vile a thing.”
But the men of Gibeah wouldn’t listen to the old man. The Levite took matters into his own hands, delivering his concubine to the men beating at the door.
And they knew her, and abused her all the night until the morning: and when the day began to spring, they let her go.
As the day dawned, the woman collapsed outside the door of the old man’s house. Her husband arose and opened the door to leave, only to find her there. Her hands were on the threshold.
And he said unto her, Up, and let us be going.
But none answered.
The Levite picked up the body of his concubine, carried her back home, and hacked her into twelve pieces. He sent one to each of the twelve tribes of Israel. Consider of it, take advice, and speak your minds. The tribes gathered and sent messengers to Benjamin: turn over those men of Gibeah so that we can put them to death.
The children of Benjamin refused, and civil war ensued—the eleven tribes against the one. Benjamin dominated the first two skirmishes, annihilating forty thousand men. The Israelites wept and fasted and made offerings to God. Should they go to battle a third time? And the Lord said, Go up; for to morrow I will deliver them into thine hand.
The next day, the children of Israel killed twenty-five thousand men of Benjamin, and their animals, and their women, and set their cities on fire. Six hundred men fled into the wilderness, and they were all that remained of the tribe of Benjamin.
Having prevailed, the Israelites faced a new problem. They could not allow an entire tribe to perish, but there were no women left to repopulate Benjamin: all their women had been killed, and all the men of Israel had sworn an oath to God not to marry their daughters to the sons of Benjamin. Cursed be he that giveth a wife to Benjamin. Instead they found one city in Israel that had sent no men to battle—and thus, had made no oath. Twelve thousand valiant men were dispatched to the city to kill every man, woman, and child, except the young women. They found four hundred young virgins in the city, brought them to the camp, and gave them as wives to the surviving men of Benjamin.
Still, two hundred men remained without wives.
Therefore they commanded the children of Benjamin, saying, Go and lie in wait in the vineyards; And see, and behold, if the daughters of Shiloh come out to dance in dances, then come ye out of the vineyards, and catch you every man his wife.
And thus they did.
This story flashed through my mind in a moment, and I thought—like exhaling a breath I’d been holding my whole life—That is bullshit. It wasn’t that I didn’t believe it. It was that every part of the story disgusted me, from God all the way down. I had forever repressed the outrage and disgust I felt at reading it, and though questioning the Bible like this shook me to my core, I also felt a glimmer of relief. Of liberation. I didn’t have to believe that this story was anything but awful—and not just the senseless carnage that left tens of thousands dead. Every woman in this story had been treated unconscionably: Men snatching unsuspecting women to force them into marriage. Other women given as gifts, having just witnessed all of their loved ones slain and their city destroyed. The old man offering his virgin daughter, and the woman sacrificed by her husband to a feral mob, raped to death. The husband then—finding her fallen with her hands on the threshold of the door—responding with “Up, and let us be going.” I’d wanted to punch him or vomit every time I’d read the words. Others might place the blame upon the men in the story, but as a predestinarian, I was most repulsed by the God who had instigated and orchestrated the whole thing.
Disgusting.
What if the God presented in this story—in this Bible—was not the real God?
I sat down on my bed, reeling. How could I suggest this possibility to Grace? If it frightened me so, there was no question it would scare her, too—especially coming from me. She might wonder whether I was being influenced by Satan. It would sound like every argument we’d spent our lives learning to dismiss out of hand. People who discounted the Bible were angry, just trying to evade the truth of the Scriptures because they were convicted by them. Of all the questions and doubts I raised, doubting the Bible itself would surely be the most preposterous to my sister.


GRACE: Eternity scares me.
MEGAN: Me, too, sometimes. I think there must be God because of existence (“science” doesn’t have answers about Creation). Then I think, what if the God of the Bible isn’t the God of creation? We don’t believe that the Koran has the truth about God. Is it just because we were told forever that this is How Things Are?
It’s comforting to think we have all the answers.
Does it really make you happy when you hear about people dying or starving or being maimed? Do you really want to ask God to hurt people?
I ask myself these questions. I think the answer is no.
When I’m not scared of the answer, I know the answer is no.
GRACE: What does that last text mean?
MEGAN: It means: I know that saying that (that it doesn’t make me happy when people die) is against what this church believes. To go against that scares me (sometimes, but not always anymore). But I know it’s the truth to say that it doesn’t make me happy.
GRACE: I just don’t know anything.
But what if we are wrong and we go to hell?
MEGAN: Why do we think it’s real? It’s starting to seem made up to scare people into doing what they say.
GRACE: But what if?
MEGAN: Then it would be horrible.
If someone told us we had to obey Artemis or we’d be tormented by Hades when we die, we’d laugh at them. I think we worry now because we’ve believed it was real forever.


I didn’t want to tell her these things, but getting these ideas out of my head—giving them form—was the only thing keeping me sane.
Grace refused to let me off the hook: How would we know any God besides the one of the Bible? If “decency” is the standard, how could we say what violates it if there are no Scriptures? Is homosexuality wrong? And adultery? And abortion? Without the Bible, how do we know when we make mistakes? What made you change on July 4? All these questions you ask me, wondering how we know the God of the Bible is the right one—did they come from C.G.?
I had never felt so ignorant, but I was glad she was forcing me to think on these questions. I answered, trying to deduce principles of morality as best I could. I knew that Grace was suspicious of C.G., that she hadn’t approved of the closeness she’d sensed between us the year before—but when she asked about him, I told her the truth: that he’d never said anything of the kind. That he’d been shocked when I messaged him that day. That it was reason that brought me here.
My sister was unconvinced.
Meanwhile, C.G. had questions of his own. Two weeks had passed since I first spoke to him of leaving, and on the news that day, a tragedy: twelve people had been murdered—a shooting at a movie theater in Aurora, Colorado. One of the victims had been an active Twitter user named Jessica Redfield. The words of her friends and colleagues were circulating on the platform, and like so many others, I found her profile and read. It shook me to see the words of a woman who had been alive not twenty-four hours before, to know that she had no idea what was about to befall her. Even more chilling was the fact that just the month before, she had escaped another shooting at a mall in Toronto: she’d gotten a strange feeling and walked out just seconds before someone opened fire in the food court. My heart ached for her and her family.


MEGAN: I just starred a tweet about @JessicaRedfield. Had you seen that? Look at her timeline. She had no warning. Scary and sad.
C.G.: I heard about her. I will.
I still don’t know if I know you. 30 days ago, you’d have been saying “God sent the shooter” today. Today: I just sense that you have empathy and that’s it.
Which?
MEGAN: The latter. I just feel disconnected from all that. It was kind of happening a little at a time (e.g., on issues like tragedies; I told you it didn’t make me happy). As soon as I started to actually let myself second-guess it, it’s just drifted so far away …
I don’t know that I could get it back even if I really wanted to.



Grace and I had been close for years, but after those few weeks of avoidance, this period brought us physically closer than ever before. When we weren’t arm in arm, we walked close enough to stumble over each other’s feet. At pickets, we stood inches apart, holding two signs each in the outside hand—as if they were a buffer to keep anyone from penetrating the protective cocoon we were building around ourselves. She had slept in my bed on occasion, but now it was almost every night. Always trying to discern which way was up. I even took to carrying her on my back, like I’d done when we were kids. It was comforting to think that among all the casualties we were about to sustain, at least we would get to keep each other.
Neither our closeness, our sadness, nor our joy was acceptable to the elders. My father got wind that Grace had sat in my lap at our hymn-singing one evening, and instructed us not to do it again. He did the same when he found out she was sleeping in my bed. When an uncle of ours caught us jumping on the trampoline one evening at dusk—a momentary release of pent-up anguish, frustration, confusion, and fear—he stared us down as he made his way from the church to his home across the yard. Grace was “in trouble.” Everything she did was suspect—and the fact that I was comforting rather than ostracizing her made me suspect, too.
As much as I tried not to imagine the actual act of leaving, Grace seemed determined to make me face what it would mean. She would text me from work, detailing all that we would lose if we walked away from the church. What comfort would there be in a world without the prospect of eternal bliss alongside our loved ones? How could we depend on mere humans for anything? And in the event that we somehow managed to withstand the storms of life—death, illness, injury—and make it to old age, how meaningless would our lives have been? If we missed all those years watching our little brothers grow up and our parents’ hair turn gray, what would we have to look forward to at the end of our lives? “I weep,” she wrote.
Running errands for my mother, I pulled my car into the nearest parking lot and wept, too.

We decided to stay.
Ultimately, Grace and I could entertain the possibility of leaving for only a few weeks before it became too much. We were each inhabiting two minds: the one that was trying to make things work within Westboro’s framework, and the one that was preparing for the worst. It made me question my sanity, unsure of every thought that crossed my mind. A double minded man is unstable in all his ways. Grace pointed out that although leaving was unthinkable, despair awaited us no matter which option we chose. “How can we be happy?” she asked me.


MEGAN: For now, we can try to avoid situations where those problems come up. Keep a low profile. Stay close to home. That kind of thing. And for the future … we don’t know for sure what’s going to happen. I have a feeling it’s going to get worse re: Steve, et al, but maybe it won’t. We could deal with that when we come to it. We can also do what you said—organize our rooms/things. Save money. Make and keep memories. All those things are good no matter if we left or stayed. We’re just going to keep trying.
GRACE: Thank you.
MEGAN: I love you, G. I’m sorry I put this burden on you.
GRACE: I love you, double. No apology necessary.
MEGAN: Had you thought about it at all—even as a vague, remote possibility—before we talked in my room that day?
GRACE: Not really. Maybe because I thought if I ever did, I’d be alone.
MEGAN: Me, too.
“If we go, we’ll go together.”
If something happens with me and they make me go, I would understand if you wanted to stay.
GRACE: Quidem. Together.


This was the plan we came up with: Stay. Attempt to convince the rest of the church to hear our objections. Pray for the best.
And only if our best efforts failed would we again consider leaving.
I also had to stop pursuing my questions about the Bible and where it stood on the spectrum of truth. Permanently dethroning the Scriptures I had so revered was inconceivable. They contained too much good to come down definitively against them, and Hell was a looming possibility that felt far too real. Know thou the God of thy father, and serve him with a perfect heart and with a willing mind: for the Lord searcheth all hearts, and understandeth all the imaginations of the thoughts: if thou seek him, he will be found of thee; but if thou forsake him, he will cast thee off for ever.
Not long after we made our decision, C.G. disappeared without warning. I hadn’t told him we were planning to stay, and he gave no explanation for his sudden withdrawal. He simply stopped answering my messages. My sister did not delight to see my despair compounded, but I knew she was glad it was over. She wanted me to be committed to our life at Westboro, and she perceived that I would be distracted so long as I had even a shadow of hope about C.G. Grace’s intuition was correct, but the ache in my chest was as deep as it had been when he and I had said goodbye the year before—and that told me all I needed to know. In spite of my hurt and anger at his sudden dismissal, I understood that the end result for me—that I would be forced to come to grips with the church and my beliefs without outside influence—was the best possible outcome. My decision had to be untainted. If we did eventually leave, it could only be because it was the right choice to make—because the church had replaced the Scriptures with the word of these fallible men—and not because I wanted something to which I wasn’t entitled. But every man is tempted, when he is drawn away of his own lust, and enticed. Do not err, my beloved brethren.
And—I thought bitterly—whatever else C.G. intended, he was teaching me a valuable lesson: on the outside, Grace and I could count on no one but ourselves.

Having established our intention to stay, Grace and I found ourselves right back where we began: in an intolerable situation that had to be confronted. But how? We decided to start slowly at first. Rather, we decided that I would start slowly. My sister was still the subject of ongoing church discipline, and like our mother, had no space at all to object. No matter how legitimate the complaint, she would be seen as recalcitrant and almost certainly excluded from the church without delay. I had only marginally more leeway, and I was well on my way to losing even that. Grace and I had refrained from using Twitter almost entirely since July 4, though she had a good excuse: as part of her punishment, the elders had forbidden her from doing so. But given my generally prolific use of the platform, my sudden lack of Twitter activity—combined with an inability to hide my heavy heart—had almost immediately become cause for worry. I began to receive concerned text messages, phone calls, and visits from other church members, with Steve at the head of the pack.
He called me up one day in late July. I was out at the noontime pickets with two of my cousins when my phone rang—and though I wanted badly to decline the call, I picked up. Delaying the discussion would only make things worse. I could never stay still when stressed, so as soon as I answered, “Hello, Steve?,” I began dragging myself up and down the sidewalk in the heavy humidity, pacing in front of a church we’d protested every single day since I was about six. Steve said I seemed down. No shit, I thought, but held my tongue. He said he was worried because I didn’t seem as unguarded as I’d always been. I didn’t attempt to deny it, but I focused on the safer sources of my despondency: the difficulty of watching my mother go through this long period of transition and general fatigue from all the work on my plate.
“You didn’t mention Grace,” Steve said flatly.
Suspicious.
I mumbled for a moment, unsure of how to proceed except to say that I was weary and wary, and then he jumped in again.
“It’s not a doctrinal thing, is it?” He was incredulous at the thought, but before he could make me answer, he launched into a diatribe about the importance of regularly engaging other members of the church. I wanted to shoot back that he and the other elders had made that impossible. That they had created such a sense of fear within the body that there was no way to speak openly about any objection to their actions. An Orwellian level of control over our every word, our every movement.
But I kept quiet. When he finished, I thanked him kindly, hung up the phone, and made a decision. I had already suspected that doctrinal errors would be the most difficult to change, because they were seen as coming directly from the Word of God: “Death Penalty for Fags,” “Fags Can’t Repent,” “Pray for More Dead Soldiers,” “Pray for More Dead Kids.” What if I focused instead on the application of doctrine? Not theology. Not major foundational principles or anything that required extensive exegesis. Just kindness within the church—the lack of which seemed to me the clearest and the simplest example that Westboro had veered far off track. This was the place to start.
Grace and I also decided that our mother seemed the safest person to approach first. Although she, too, had been deprived of her voice in church matters, she was the one who had helped convince our father to hear us out about the Photoshopping incidents. I had to believe that she knew her treatment to be unscriptural, no matter how often the elders made her profess otherwise. I was cautious at first, asking more questions about the details of the incidents that continued to occur almost daily, just interminable pettiness. I knew she was trying to hide her sorrow from me and my siblings, but she was no more successful than I was—especially since I was paying closer attention than ever. What did my mother really think?
As the weeks passed, I expanded the scope of these discussions to include the treatment of Justin and Lindsey, as well. And then Grace. Even the cousin who had been voted out a few months earlier. I started with my mother, and then continued with my Gran, both of whom were sympathetic. Neither of them disagreed with my analysis and both understood my despair—but whereas Gran would shake her head and agree that things looked very bad indeed, my mom would mostly listen. The rest of the church—including her own husband—presented a united front as to my mother’s grave sins. They made her believe that if she felt any offense or sense of unfairness with respect to their treatment of her, then it was completely a result of her pride, not because there was anything unjustified about their cruelty. They ascribed ill motives to many of her actions—even positive actions—and then they retaliated against her on that basis. And if my mother tried to dispute their analysis, there would be even more trouble. As I came to appreciate these dynamics, my outrage increased and I grew bolder. They were making her believe that she was literally insane. That is—as I would later learn—they were “gaslighting” her. I became the only person in her life willing to confirm, directly and unequivocally, that the accusations against her were unwarranted, off base, and often utterly deranged.
Although my mom avoided saying so directly, I eventually came to believe that she and I were on the same page about the unscriptural nature of so many of the actions and decisions implemented by the elders. We would talk, and then we would pray together that the Lord would fix everything. The only difference between us, I realized, was that she had no doubt that God was with Westboro. It never seemed to occur to my mother that all of this misconduct might be evidence that we were wrong—that there was something rotten at the core of our beliefs.
With my brother Sam, I presented my disputes as hypotheticals or general curiosities. I led with few specifics, lest he end the conversation and send me back to our dad—but he sensed there was more to my questions than I was letting on and pressed me to come out with it. Standing outside a Topeka church during our Sunday morning pickets, I nearly broke down in tears of desperate frustration as I spoke of the cousin who’d been kicked out. I made my case, citing verse after verse that showed how we had done her wrong. I tried and failed to be calm, and he erupted in response, justifying it all: the church had made a decision, and God was with us, and that was that. He was angry, but he also seemed genuinely perplexed that I had a problem with what had been done. I knew I was getting into dangerous territory and backed off again.
At first, I steered clear of mentioning anything to Bekah, because I was afraid of what she would do. With every good intention, she would surely have turned me over to the elders for what I now saw as “re-education,” putting me solidly on their radar as a troublemaker. But if Grace and I decided to leave, I knew that I would then regret it forever if I didn’t try to talk to Bekah about what was happening. Driving around Topeka with her, running errands after church, I poured my heart out. I was cautious at first, restrained, describing everything as clinically as possible, the whole litany of misconduct going all the way back to the Photoshopping—but the longer I spoke, the more desperate I became. As I parked the car in the Office Max parking lot, my words came faster and faster, rising to a fevered pitch until I was sobbing hysterically. She reached over to hug me as I finished my jeremiad. “… and I just don’t have any hope that it’ll ever be fixed!” She started crying then, too, and we stretched across the front seat in an awkward embrace. I knew I was scaring her, but I had to lay it all on the line. “I’m so sorry,” I whispered.
“It’s okay,” she said, weeping. “It’s okay if you break my heart.” I had said all I could say. She walked into the store while I tried to compose myself, and on our drive back to the house, her focus was on encouraging me to speak to the elders. If I could just tell them these things, surely there would be a good answer. I told her I would keep trying, and she seemed relieved—not particularly worried about the troublesome case I had made against the elders themselves. So confident that all was well in the Lord’s church. Trust and obey was second nature.
Finally, after several weeks, I went to my father. Again, I tried to be calm and reasonable. I limited myself to subtle questions and gentle pushback—possible only thanks to Herculean efforts to swallow the panic rising in my chest—but at every turn, I was shut down. As day after day, week after week passed with no improvement and no obvious way forward, I began to despair again.

As September rolled in, my mantra changed. Gone were the days of Grace … I don’t think I can do this forever.
“Grace. I can’t do this forever.”
We sat together in Grace’s bedroom, she at the foot of her bed and me on the floor staring up at her. This room still felt very much like a child’s—white curtains with little blue stars printed all over them, her walls and ceiling painted in bright, primary colors. It had been such a happy time when we’d repainted it two years before. All of the siblings had been obsessed with a bizarre YouTube cartoon called Charlie the Unicorn, and in one corner of the room, I’d used a tiny brush to paint cheery polka dots and quotes from the show: “It’s a land of sweets, and joy, and … joyness.” It hit me again how very young she was. I couldn’t ask her to leave. I wouldn’t pressure her.
But I also couldn’t keep walking this fine line. How long would I be able to avoid media and funeral pickets without detection? How long until someone handed me a sign I believed unscriptural? How long could I continue to choose my words ever so carefully—like some dishonest politician? I largely escaped explicit lies, but I grew ever more uneasy as I faced the fact that I was deceiving everyone both within the church and without. I might be limiting my own behavior, but with my presence and assistance, I was endorsing the rest of Westboro’s behavior, too. The church had always been all or nothing—in or out—and this was no-man’s-land. I could not survive here.
Grace and I eventually decided that unless something major changed, and soon, we would have to leave. We would begin to prepare in earnest, and in the meantime I would also take greater risks in raising these objections with others. The closer we came to walking out the door, the less I had to lose by sticking my neck out to petition the others. And what if Grace somehow managed to get kicked out before we could actually leave? We started a new game of Words With Friends, and Grace changed her username so that it was unidentifiable. No matter what happened, we could always communicate privately there.
As soon as the decision was made, my first course of action became immediately clear: apologize to Justin and Lindsey. Mindful that I was now in the territory of direct rebellion against my father’s instructions, I drafted a text message to Justin explaining why we had suddenly disappeared from his and Lindsey’s life. Even as fearful as I was, I knew that reaching out to our erstwhile friends was the right thing to do. I should have done it months ago.
That I had to rebel in order to apologize struck me as hopelessly corrupt.
I thought my heart would stop while waiting for Justin to respond. Again, the prospect of imminent doom hung over my head—whether destruction from God or discovery by my family—and I tried to still my shaking hands as I unloaded the dishwasher. Perhaps Justin had learned his lesson last time, and was already turning me in. Perhaps the elders were launching an investigation this very second. My fear got the better of me, and I texted again to beg for a response—ironic, considering that I had left them hanging for over three months.
When Justin finally returned my text, it was everything I had been trying to tell my parents for months: That he and Lindsey had had no idea why they were being treated this way. That the last time he had tried to reconcile, it had gone horribly awry. That it had been painful to be left in the dark, “tossed off and forgotten,” and that his wife was angry about the way the church had managed things. Justin was afraid of getting into trouble for this text exchange, too, and promised not to tell anyone but Lindsey.
At least we had that assurance.
But from what Justin said, Lindsey seemed done with the drama. She saw no hope for change. Justin told me that the elders had even forbidden sewing lessons with some of the younger girls that Lindsey had planned with their parents. She and Justin had planned a “double date” with another young couple, and that, too, had been disallowed. I was baffled. Having meals together was a regular part of our fellowship, and had been for as long as I had been alive. To my mind, it was now undeniable that the elders’ decisions were primarily driven not by Scripture, but by a need to keep church members in our place. To make us understand that bending to their will was the only option. Nothing else mattered.
Justin and I tried to orchestrate the circumstances of a church-sanctioned apology from Grace to Lindsey: we would each separately and cautiously reach out to my parents. We were still trying to make it fit. Still hoping we could make it work.
But it wasn’t to be. When I gently approached my father that evening, he blew up. He had heard enough from me about the issue. I retreated with the same feeling I’d gotten almost every time I’d challenged his decisions over the previous year: that hardliners like Steve and Sam were behind this new authoritarianism. When I disputed elder edicts, my father’s choices were limited to either shutting me down or resisting the militant faction among the elders—and we both knew how the latter would go. He also just seemed convinced that their collective wisdom had to be correct. After all, this was the Lord’s church.
And on top of everything else, he was surely as exhausted with the whole mess as my mother, Grace, and I all were.
“Time to despair,” I wrote to Justin that night. “There was a blowup (no one knows about any of our discussions, though). Abort mission. I’m so sorry, friend.” Justin responded that he was at a loss. Miserable. Hopeless. We’d reached the end of the line, but he thanked me for even making the effort.
“Take care,” he said.
I told Grace everything just before bed, breaking down when I got to the part about our father. In our estimation, he was one of only two or three elders who took to heart that verse about humility—in lowliness of mind let each esteem other better than themselves—and it contributed to his unwillingness to challenge the others. “They should have been learning his compassion!” I wept bitterly. Instead, they had insisted he take on their severity.
I slumped onto the bed beside my sister and pressed my face into a pillow. She reached over to stroke my back, and as we lay there in silence for a moment, I realized it wasn’t just the change in my father that I was mourning. It was the final crumbling of an image I had held so long in mind. Westboro Baptist Church. Special interest of the Almighty. Uniquely guided to eternal triumph by God Himself.
Sordid. Base. Banal.
Human.

Making the decision to leave gave me greater boldness in my futile attempts at reform, but it also introduced yet another impossible question:
When?
Neither Grace nor I had an answer—just a growing list of reasons that it couldn’t be now. We couldn’t leave before Mom’s birthday, surely. And what about our parents’ anniversary? How cruel it would be to ruin everything right at this moment. And then there were the things we couldn’t bear to leave without, all that we would forever lose access to once we left. What about family recipes? And home movies? And old photos? We should wait just a little while longer …
There was no denying that this was partly a stalling tactic, based on a dwindling hope that drastic change would occur and save us from our plans.
At the first prospect of losing everyone back in July, Grace and I had become painfully aware that there was so much we didn’t know about our parents’ lives, and our grandmother’s. What did we know about our Gran’s life before Westboro? My sisters and I had begun interviewing her almost immediately after I spoke my treason to Grace. We’d file across the backyard in the evening, past the yellow slide and the pool filled with splashing cousins, and into the church. We’d find Gran upstairs in her bedroom next to the church library where Gramps held a Bible study at 7:30 each morning. At eighty-six, our grandmother was so quiet and gentle. Smaller than I’d ever seen her because of the deep curve in her spine. Stooped with age. She’d lie on her bed, and Grace would lie next to her, Bekah on the floor at the foot of the bed and me at its head. I’d switch on my iPhone’s recorder, and we’d take turns asking questions, and I’d try not to choke at the thought of losing my Gran, at the tsunami of guilt washing over me for even thinking of betraying her.
I started recording everything. Hymn-singing practices. The sounds of our monthly birthday parties. Evening Bible study. My mother’s stories about my siblings and me when we were young. A prayer she said for me. The din inside the van on picket trips. Bekah reading aloud. The repartee of my little brothers. Even if I somehow got them back later—even if they eventually left—all the years of their little-boy voices would be gone.
An endless stream of photos. A family kickball game. Mom and Luke getting ready to walk to school one morning. My parents holding hands as they walked through a department store. A family visit to our favorite art museum in Kansas City. Milkshake parties with Gran and Gramps. Walks to the park with my nieces and nephew. The front porch where Grace and I ate breakfast each morning. A trip out for snow cones with Luke.
In those months, every joyful experience became a torture that left Grace and me in tears and gasping for breath. We’d huddle together on my bed like that, trying to remember what it was like before all this. What it was like to be happy without the inescapable sense that we were watching the slow, excruciating deaths of everyone we loved. I began obsessively taking notes to chronicle every moment. I filled notebooks with descriptions of routine interactions, terrified of losing even a single one. As if clinging to these memories might alleviate the agony. As if recording it all could keep them from slipping from my grasp.
I made a list entitled “Funny/Nice Things Said During Hugs.” Gran, on how she could always count on me to smell good. Gramps, on how my curls in his face made it difficult to breathe—how he was going to drown in them someday. Mom, on how she didn’t mind being smothered by them. Dad, on how he loved it when I finished his sentences. “I love you, Mimi,” he said. It was the name Luke had given me as a toddler, when he couldn’t pronounce mine correctly. “We’re very fortunate to have you as a daughter.” I wrote it down before he could regret it. Before he could take it back. Before he could take down the photos of me that hung on the walls, before he could repurpose my bedroom, before he could spend the rest of his life erasing me from his memory as much as possible.
I started to clean out my room. I had never moved anywhere in my life, and I didn’t know how anyone ever did it. It took weeks, because I pored over everything. Old photo albums. Shoeboxes full of birthday cards and thank you notes I’d been saving since elementary school. I scrutinized every page of the baby book my father had been maintaining for me since I was born. He added to it every year, and it was full to bursting by now, outgrowing the three-inch leather binder he’d bought to expand it. Our family grew larger each time I flipped to a new page, until I came to something I didn’t recognize. A note my father had slipped in two months earlier, back in August.

Dear Miss Megan,
Thank you for all the kind things you do for me. I love you dearly. I don’t say either of those things enough. We are so fortunate. Your mother and I love you so much!
Love, Dad

A little at a time, Grace and I began packing our things in boxes. My sister made labels that said things like “shoes” or “books.” I numbered my boxes, meticulously cataloguing every single item that went into each one (“Shoes—Blue Wedge Heels from Jael’s Wedding”). I tucked each piece of jewelry I owned into a tiny white envelope labeled with the date and occasion on which I’d received it. If I ever forgot any detail, there would be no one around to remind me. I copied sixty-three DVDs’ worth of home movies, watching scene after scene play like a funeral reel.
And all the while I knew what would happen when we left. I knew the heartbreak they would feel, and the betrayal. I had felt it when Josh left eight years earlier—a devastating postmortem that went on for weeks after he left. We had racked our brains looking for every sign of his duplicity. And with each new instance we found, we had transformed our horror into outrage. All of us who remained were disgusted with his perfidy. How could he? What sort of monster could pretend to be one of us, knowing all the while that he was going to abandon us forever?
It did not occur to us to think of his devastation. We couldn’t see his terror, or his despair, or his desperation. It was so much easier to rewrite history and cast him as a villain. To insist that he didn’t care about us. That he was a selfish jerk who wanted only to pursue his own lusts. We could not imagine that this nineteen-year-old boy could have a legitimate reason to leave the only Church of the Lord Jesus Christ in the world today. We could not consider that there was anything truly wrong with us.
My parents, my brothers, my sister, my Gramps and my Gran—they would all look back just like I had. They would see me copying those home movies. Interviewing Gran. Cleaning out my bedroom. They would search through all the text messages and emails I had sent. They would remember my tears and my refusal to tweet, and they would wonder how I ever could have looked them in the eye. They wouldn’t understand that I’d wanted to tell them everything. That I’d tried so hard to keep them. That I’d been begging for change.
That I’d wanted to stay.

November dawned, and Grace and I couldn’t hold on anymore.
Steve had announced a new round of Sign Movies—short videos, each featuring a member of the church explaining one of Westboro’s signs—and asked all members to choose which sign they wanted to address. Grace and I both signed up, but we knew we wouldn’t go through with it. The videos would be filmed November 23 to 25, so we had until then.
Less than three weeks.
We didn’t know it yet, but we wouldn’t make it even that long.
At the end of September, as Grace and I were starting to plan our exit in earnest, it became clear to me that Justin and Lindsey wouldn’t last at Westboro. Especially from the perspective of an outsider, their treatment must have seemed so bizarre and unjustified. Why would they tolerate it indefinitely? So I reached out to Justin, ever so cautiously, to see if they were going to leave, too.
They were.
We started talking. First Justin and I. Then Lindsey and I. But Lindsey still didn’t want to talk to Grace. She was still suspicious. I told Lindsey that Grace had assured me there had never been anything more than friendship with Justin, and that I believed her. On the day that Grace finally spoke with Justin for the first time since May, I sent her a message:


MEGAN: Dear Gracie, Just in case I don’t get back before you leave, a word of caution (as if you needed any more…): be careful with what you say to Justin. I know you’re cautious and discreet, and I know you wouldn’t deliberately do anything to hurt a friend. Just be careful not to put him in a position to be secretive or duplicitous to his wife; distrust—especially in that kind of relationship—is poison. No matter what, you’re a likely temptation. Sweet, charming, beautiful, talented, funny, and more. All those things + closeness to Justin = easy for Lindsey to suspect something. Make your conduct above reproach, and (if she’ll give you the opportunity again) be her friend. Make sure she knows she can trust you. You’re a good person. And you want good for people, and you want to *be* good to people. It’s hard for me to believe that there’s a person in the world you couldn’t win over.
You probably didn’t need all this—but sometimes you say obvious things to me, and it helps me be focused and think clearly. Love you, Sun.


Given that we still weren’t allowed to speak, the four of us began a disjointed discussion about our plans. Justin and Lindsey wanted to move to North Carolina, and at first the dream was for the five of us to buy a house together. I would get a job, and the other three adults would go to school, and Grace and I would help take care of Justin and Lindsey’s sweet baby boy. If we were living with our good friends—people who knew this life, who knew our family, who understood what it meant to leave them—then maybe we wouldn’t be so lonely. The problem was that the more time passed, the more strained these relationships became. The four of us could hardly keep ourselves together under the intense pressure, let alone be a support for the others.
Desperate for help dealing with the emotional fallout of our decision, Grace and I reached out to one of our old high school English teachers. Whereas most of our teachers had preferred to ignore Westboro’s existence while we were in school, Keith Newbery had been one of the very few who hadn’t been afraid of the subject. He was a bit of a gentle giant—a former offensive lineman for Washburn’s football team when he was in college—and though he was less than a decade older than me, I had a sense of him as an older, wiser, calming presence. In school, he had never shared his beliefs or tried to shame us for ours; he just asked thoughtful questions when related issues came up in our homework or in the news. Twitter had opened an even closer line of communication with Newbery, and we’d kept up with him there over the previous year. He ran an account called @TchrQuotes (“Teacher Quotes”), which he filled with sarcastic riffs on things his students said. His posts were funny and inoffensive—“Nobody in this meeting knows I have a McChicken in my pocket.”—but whenever he tweeted me in a friendly tone, he was vehemently attacked by Westboro’s critics. That this cycle never dissuaded him from his kindness was part of what made Grace and me believe that we could trust him.
Newbery was everything we could have hoped and more: a calm, rational, dependable third party. Objective. Someone who knew us, and our history, and our family, and who wanted to help us, whatever we decided. We started moving boxes into his family’s garage in late October, with the understanding that if Westboro changed, we would bring them all back. I could hardly think straight during that time, and I unleashed onto Newbery all of the thoughts and fears and sorrows and grief that I couldn’t subject my sister to. He was a voice of compassion and reason when we needed it most—which was fortunate because confusion was mounting.
Justin explained that he and Lindsey were splitting up. The last several months had been too much pressure on their relationship. They were both planning to move to North Carolina, but now to different cities. Now what? I still wanted to help them, but getting into the middle of an increasingly messy situation seemed like a bad idea. I started to back off. Maybe we’d just have to go our own way after all.
But then Justin sent a message to Grace on her twentieth birthday: he wanted to be more than friends. I was aghast. He was a worldly twenty-eight-year-old, married, with a young son. She was naïve, much younger than her years, and was on the verge of losing everything, still living in an impossibly controlling home under even more scrutiny than usual. How could he possibly do this—especially now?
I thought of Lindsey. I had told her there was nothing between Justin and Grace. I could not imagine being in her place. She had come to Westboro looking for God, and she was leaving a year later with her world a shambles. I could not believe what had happened to her. I was ashamed of all of us.
Justin was not pleased to find out I was discouraging Grace. He insisted that he and Lindsey had been planning to split anyway, independent of Grace. He’d told me about their split weeks ago, remember? Why was I trying to control my sister the way our family controlled us? Hadn’t I spent my whole life telling other people how to live? Who did I think I was?
It quickly became a moot point as everything unraveled at once. The relationship between Justin and Grace existed mostly by text, and lasted about two weeks before Grace ended it—but after it was over, Lindsey found out. The email came a few days later.
“Dear WBC…”

November 11, 2012. 3:55 P.M. Sunday.
I knew we had come to the end of the line as soon as I heard my father’s voice. Stern. Gruff. Urgent.
He threw open the door to my bedroom, and my head snapped up. Grace and I were crying again, and she was scratching my head.
“You need to come talk.” Eyes wide. He turned on his heel and headed down the hall. Grace and I looked at each other and tried to dry our faces.
We followed him to my parents’ bedroom, where Mom was sitting in the new rocking chair. “It’s okay, it’s okay.” Her words were quick and urgent, too.
We all sat down in their little sitting area, Grace and I on one side and our parents on the other. Dad started reading an email that Lindsey had sent him. About Grace and Justin. About our plans to leave. Things that were true mixed with things that were not. I was looking down, listening, shaking my head, knowing that we had to leave immediately.
I looked up, and my mother was holding her phone. A moment later, I heard the sound that an iPhone plays when you start recording a video.
“Please don’t,” I whispered.
She apologized. She’d meant to take a photo.
My father continued to read.
I understood why my mother had said, It’s okay, it’s okay.
Because there was hope for me.
I could have repented.
But there was no saving Grace. After this email, there was no possibility she wouldn’t be voted out.
I looked at my sister and spoke in a low voice. “We need to go.”
Our father hadn’t heard. Our mother had.
I looked up.
I watched her mouth drop open in a look of shocked horror that will haunt me until I die.
I’d thought she might know. After all our talks, I’d thought she might see it coming.
She had not.
We filed back to our bedrooms to pack. We’d moved around twenty boxes out already, but there was so much more.
We tried to stay together. We knew people would come to try to talk us out of leaving. But we were sobbing, not thinking clearly, and Grace darted into her room next door.
Sam and Steve in the hall. Steve pushed the door open. I pushed it closed and kept packing. He pushed it open again, and wouldn’t let me close it this time. They were yelling, saying that I knew better than this. My face was so contorted that I couldn’t form sounds to make words. They left. Grace would tell me later that she’d asked our father to make them go. She’d heard them yelling in the hall. “She doesn’t want to talk to them!” she told Dad.
My mom came in and asked that I go talk to Gramps. That didn’t I owe him that? I’d known this was coming. Mom had made others on the cusp of leaving do it in the past. A last-ditch effort to convince them to stay. How could anyone look at our beloved Gran and Gramps and say they were leaving? I wanted to say no. I looked at her face. I couldn’t.
I walked across the yard with her, not registering that this would be my last time. This path I’d traversed, often several times a day, since I was a child. Down the sidewalk, past the trampolines and the green cover over the pool, in the kitchen door, and up the stairs. My mother was telling me that I didn’t have to follow Grace out the door.
We sat down with Gran and Gramps in his bedroom, the television blaring as always. He shut it off. Mom tried to explain. She thought this was because of Justin. She didn’t understand that he was nothing. Absolutely nothing. That we would never give her up for a boy.
That we would never hurt her for a boy.
Gran, so quiet, disbelieving. “You don’t want to leave us, do you?” I wept harder at her gentleness. I couldn’t breathe. “You’re not gonna do this…?”
I hugged her as hard as I could. “I’m sorry, Granny!” I sobbed into her ear.
“Please,” she whispered.
“Meg…?” Mom said.
I had lived to support them. There was no worse anguish than causing them pain.
I will never know grief worse than seeing the pain I was causing. Hearing the hope in their words, and knowing that it was too late.
“We can’t let you go, honey.” Gran held me tight. “We’ll be so sorry if you go.” She paused. “Why?” Nonplussed.
I tried to explain. I had wanted to tell them openly for months. I had determined that if I couldn’t make my objections while I stayed, then I would explain them in detail when I left. Maybe then they would listen. Maybe then they would understand.
But I couldn’t say more than a few words at a time.
“She basically says that she feels hopeless,” my mother said. “She has a litany of … She thinks that the … Well, I don’t want to speak for her.” Even now, after more than eighteen months of mistreatment, on the verge of losing two of her three daughters, her “right hand,” she was too afraid of the elders even to relay my grievances about what they’d been up to.
“I’ve talked to Mom about this before…” I wept. I said a few words about the elders. About the way my mother had been treated, up until that very day.
“Well, this is not the way to treat your mom,” Gramps said gently.
It was quiet for a moment. I couldn’t speak.
He looked over at my mother. “Well. I thought we had a jewel this time, Shirl.” How quickly his voice had turned. Cutting. Disgusted. “Looks like we got it all wrong.”
Three elders walked in a moment later, including Sam and Steve.
I stood up. “I don’t … I can’t…” I was in no state to talk, and I would not be bullied. Not now. A conversation that was sure to go nowhere.
A singular urge to run. I turned—
“Megan!” My mom lowered her voice to an incredulous whisper, “Are you saying that your pride is more important than your soul?”
“No!” I whispered back. Of course not. I panicked. “I need to go—”
I ran out of the bedroom, down the stairs, out the kitchen door, and smashed into Jael on her way in. Jonah was right outside. It was so cold. I hugged him and told him I loved him so much, forever. That I was sorry. To please keep my phone number and to call me if he ever wanted to. He hugged me back, but he was only fifteen. He looked confused, unsure of what he was supposed to do.
I sprinted the rest of the way home, back up to my bedroom.
Margie appeared a few minutes later, crying as hard as I was. “Please don’t do this,” she pleaded. “Please don’t go. You’ve seen and said too much. You know this is right. Please don’t go. I’ve never asked anyone not to go.”
We held each other and wept.
“I’m sorry, Margie. I love you so much.”
She let go after a long moment. She patted my back and walked away.
She walked away.
Jael came in a short while later, acting aloof and unmoved. She sat down on my bed, staring at her phone, typing away. She didn’t look at me. She wanted to know why we were leaving. Her coldness in the face of my chaos was painful, but it made it a little easier to speak. I kept packing and answered as best I could through tears and grief. I spoke of the elders and their abuse of authority. I spoke of the mistreatment of church members. I spoke of doctrinal error, of unscriptural temperaments and picket signs. I told her I didn’t think God was with Westboro anymore. She said little and stayed composed, but her voice broke when she thanked me for all the work I’d done on her wedding. How much time and energy I had spent to make it special.
“I only ever wanted to be good to you,” I tried to say. I had to say it twice before she could understand.
“But friendship is a two-way street,” she said, “and if I haven’t been doing it on my side, I’m sorry.” She was quiet for a long time, the only sound the clacking of the hangers as I pulled shirts off them one by one. Bekah and I had shared a wardrobe for years—“the community closet”—and I had to decide what to take and what to leave.
“Have you been praying for the Lord to help you?” Jael asked.
I nodded. “And my mom and I would together.”
My dad walked in to discuss my assertion that I didn’t have a voice anymore. “Are you happy?” he asked Jael. She nodded. “Do you think you have a voice?”
“Through my husband,” Jael said. Simpering.
“And is that acceptable or unacceptable to you?”
“That’s the way it should be,” Jael answered. “She has a voice through you. She has to submit to her father. That’s her lot.”
And that was how the elders had managed to pull this off, I thought. The conflation of parental and ecclesiastical authority was only possible in a church like ours, where nearly everyone was related. By rendering us “children” so long as we were unmarried, they thwarted all possible challenges to their control. There was no need to listen to what anyone else thought, because as our parents, they would tell us what to think. I shook my head involuntarily. My father had never been like this. I hated what this church had done to him. I hated what it had done to my mother. I hated what it was doing to our family, and to everyone we had taken aim at outside.
This place was toxic.
I ran downstairs to sort out my desk and found Bekah. She held out her arms and I fell into them, both of us openly weeping. She was getting ready to head out the door.
“I have to go drive with Jayme,” she said, “and you gotta do what you’re doing, so I guess we’re parting ways.”
“I love you so much, Bekah.” Why didn’t better words exist? Your voice will follow me like a shadow for the rest of my days and I’ll never be whole without you and The nights I dream of you will be my happiest. I couldn’t let her go.
“I don’t know how you can say that and be doing this,” she cried, “but Mom says you’re always welcome back here.”
“I tried to talk to you about all this…” I wept into her shoulder. Someone was playing a hymn on the piano.
“I hoped you just needed to get the right words from the right person,” Bekah said.
We clung to each other until it didn’t make sense, and then she tapped me three times—the way we always signaled the end of a massage—and she turned to go.
Noah texted me: “Pls turn around.”
I looked up, and he stood there looking nervous. Afraid to speak to me.
I turned, and I saw Zach’s computer from across the room. Noah often used it to play Minecraft, but now he’d set it up with a message for me. “MEGAN, LOOK” it read, with an arrow pointing to the second monitor. I moved closer. He had pulled up the Kansas City Star article from a year earlier. I’m all in. I wanted to tell him how often I had wished to go back to that place. How much I’d wanted to un-ask the questions, to un-see the contradictions. Instead, I hugged him. He was only thirteen. Maybe one day he would look back at this moment and understand. The way I had with Josh.
I texted him back. “I love you, my brother. Forever and ever. I’m so sorry.”
One by one, I said goodbye to my siblings as I came upon them.
Three hours after my father walked into my bedroom, he was helping us load the minivan with our things. We’d have to come back the next day with a U-Haul. We couldn’t stay in the house that night—our lifelong home was not our house anymore—so he would leave us at the motel next to our old middle school. He checked us in, helped us unload the minivan, hugged us, and left.
Room 108 was cold and sterile, entirely devoid of life, warmth, or happiness. It was everything I was afraid the world would be, and I couldn’t bear to stay there, not then. I sent a message to Newbery asking if Grace and I could stay with his family that night, and then Grace and I sat on the bed, waiting.
A few minutes passed, and then my cousin Libby arrived with her husband. I hadn’t spoken to her in the years since she’d left the church—she’d been cast as “Libidinous Libby” upon her exit, a selfish, self-important whore—but along with so many other of Westboro’s judgments, I’d started to question their thoughts on her, too. I’d worked up the courage to reach out to her a few weeks earlier—a phone call to her office, because I was afraid she’d turn on me and publish my message if I emailed her. I’d told Libby that Grace and I were probably leaving, and she said, “I want you to come live with me,” and we spoke like friends who hadn’t just missed the last three and a half years of each other’s lives.
In the howling, icy wind and the stark fluorescent light of the motel parking lot, the four of us loaded suitcases into the back of Libby’s car. They’d take it all back to their home in Lawrence, thirty miles away. My sister and I would follow in the morning.
We hugged them goodbye, and they headed home with our things.
As Grace and I drove to Newbery’s house in silence, I thought of a conversation I’d had with Bekah back in August. A letter had gone viral—a father disowning his son for coming out as gay—and she had called me into her office at the law firm.
“I can’t believe it!” she’d exclaimed. “This guy actually says it right!” She started to read aloud, detailing the father’s refusal to have any further communication with his son. Their happy times together were a thing of the past, and his son was no longer welcome in his home.
“If you choose not to attend my funeral,” he wrote, “my friends and family will understand.”
I’d felt my heart sink as Bekah read, but she was too excited to notice that I’d only managed a dull “Wow…” in response. I knew this letter was exactly the posture my family would take if we left. Grace and I had wept that night, realizing that it was gay people—I’d stopped using the “f” word by then—who would best understand what we were going through. The community we had antagonized more than any other. I hated that it had had to come to this for me to understand what the church had been doing to vulnerable people for so long.
For with what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged: and with what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again.
I couldn’t escape the sense of certainty pulsing through me as I pulled into Newbery’s driveway.
No matter what I had intended, I deserved every bit of this.
Newbery opened the door. His two sons and his wife were already asleep. He led us down to their basement, a pile of linens in hand, and Grace and I each picked a couch and tucked ourselves in. This place was foreign, but unlike the motel, it was bright and cozy. And most important: we had friends here. I was ready to cry myself to sleep, assuming Newbery would leave us to our misery and head off to bed. Instead he sat down in a recliner and talked with us for a couple of hours. I hadn’t known how badly I needed to talk to someone until he started asking his gentle, unassuming questions. How urgently I needed to mourn my family aloud, free of the need to stifle and camouflage every word.
Why had they made it so hard to tell the truth?
Just before 10 A.M. the following morning, I parked an enormous U-Haul at the end of our front sidewalk. Grace and I walked up to the front door like we had a thousand times before.
I rang the doorbell.
“Why did you ring the doorbell?!” Grace was incredulous.
“Because…” I had never thought to do otherwise. We were outsiders now. I had internalized my new status overnight.
My parents reinforced that status from the moment they opened the door. They stayed with us wherever we roamed in the house, apparently afraid to leave us alone. As if they couldn’t trust us. It hurt my heart, but not like the jacket I found hanging on my bedroom door. Tucked into the hood was a sheet of paper torn from a notebook, with Bekah’s handwriting: “This is yours, Meg.” She had received the jacket as a gift from Jael several years earlier, but she’d shared it with me because she knew I loved it, too. We wore it so much that we’d put a hole in the left sleeve. The first moment I was alone, I slipped across the hall into Bekah’s bedroom, pressed my forehead to the floor, and wept so hard no sound came out. At the thought of her lying in bed thinking about this the night before. At the thought that she wanted to give me this piece of her—of us—to take with me. At the fact that she couldn’t say anything more than This is yours, Meg without running afoul of our family’s expectations of her. I tore a page out of the same notebook, but my thoughts were a circle of I love you I’m sorry I love you I’m sorry I love you I’m sorry, and expressions of those thoughts were the only things to come out of my pencil.

Dearest sister-mine, Flor, Babi Lynne, Bobber Sue,
I’m so sorry. I wish I could have been better. I love you more than words could ever say. I will love you and miss you forever, no matter what. I’m so sorry for everything, and for every offense I caused you. I’m so sorry. I love you.
Swirl, MegHeart, Megabee, Megabus

I left the tears that fell on the page and on her desk. They would be dry by the time she saw my note, but I hoped she would feel them anyway, and that they would say more than my words.
As my parents, Grace, and I moved back and forth between the front door and the bedrooms, our timing became mismatched, and I found myself alone for another moment. I looked around, and then took off down the basement steps, rounded the corners, and ran into the darkened party room. Filled with a dozen long tables each encircled by chairs, this was a space we used to celebrate birthdays in the winter, and for meetings and Bible studies year-round. I flipped on the lights and pulled my phone from the back pocket of my jeans.
Photos of my grandparents and their children hung all along the room’s two longest walls. I had wanted to take photos of them all before I left, but there hadn’t been time. There was never enough time. I pressed record and made my way around the room as fast as I could, afraid I’d be caught and told to stop. Still filming, I switched off the lights and continued to move quickly, back through the laundry room with the drain that had terrified me as a kid, back through the rooms that Josh had lived in just before he left, back up the fourteen steps, and into the kitchen. Weeping now, I moved through the downstairs, carefully avoiding my parents and sister.
This could not be happening.
Making my way around the upstairs next, I stopped at the photos of an exuberant baby Gabe. They were taken before his headful of blond curls had come in, back when he was bald and so fat he had three chins. I wondered if we would ever be friends before he grew bald again. I choked on the thought.
I made it back to my room. Grace and our dad were outside loading a piece of furniture into the U-Haul. Hesitant, my mom pushed open the door to my rapidly emptying bedroom. I looked up and stopped moving. She stayed just inside the door. She looked like she wanted to come closer, but was afraid. Her tone was cautious.
“What will you do, Meg? You’ve loved these doctrines. You were a little girl, walking around the park—”
Her voice broke and her face twisted in despair. Gage Park. Our earliest pickets, back when I was five. She finished the sentence in tears.
“—and you were so happy.”
She turned to go, and all I could do was weep. I had no idea what I was going to do. I just knew that I would never be free of the pain of causing her pain. Of all the dreadful things I had ever done or ever would do, nothing—nothing—would be worse than this.
The van was filled too quickly. We asked for our Bibles and headscarves and hymn books, and our father ran down to the church to get them. We met him and our mother outside by the garage. No hymn books, he said. Those belonged to the church. I thought of the blue hymnal that I’d written all over when Grace was born: “Megan Phelps-Roper + Grace Phelps-Roper” with a heart drawn around them. If they didn’t cover it up, it would be an object of scorn and pity for its new owner. Those two foolish girls.
It was time for final hugs. Dad first.
“Well, we’re not gonna be doing this for a while.” He didn’t mean it unkindly.
And then Mom.
“Goodbye, doll.”
I was shaking. I don’t remember if I said anything. I just held them tight for as long as they let me.
Grace and I turned to cross the yard to the van.
“Girls?” Mom called out.
We turned.
“You can always come back.”
Her hope broke me more than her tears.




