






5. The Lust of the Flesh

The only thing he ever lied to me about was his age. Since we were living in the golden era of catfishing, it occurred to me that this was nothing short of a true miracle. I wasn’t even sure it counted as a lie, either, since the number he gave me without context (“Age 38.”) was his age when we first met. It was February 2011, and my church’s website, GodHatesFags.com, had just been taken over by the hacker collective known as Anonymous, which replaced our Gospel preaching with a mocking message. The takeover happened live on a popular web show during a joint interview with the hacker and my mother—defiant even in the face of ostensible defeat—and the video spread rapidly, garnering half a million views in twelve hours and featured on YouTube’s home page. We responded predictably, my aunt Margie penning a provocative press release that I immediately posted to Twitter along with our challenge to Anonymous: “Bring it, cowards.” Westboro and Anonymous are each notorious in their own right, and with the added spectacle of a mid-interview hack, the story was irresistible. The drama was reported by major news outlets across the country—which is how my name and photo ended up in the RSS feed of a man living in a tiny town in eastern South Dakota.
The first tweet he sent me must have been crude, because my response included a warning to “get your head outta the gutter.” His message was lost to me almost instantly, though, one among a deluge. With the advice and consent of my mother, I had become Westboro’s voice on Twitter eighteen months earlier, and had found great success at getting attention for our message. For years, my proximity to my mother had thrust me into the logistical work that powered Westboro’s picketing engine. Combined with my boundless energy and enthusiasm for our beliefs, that proximity had also given me a high-profile public voice that others of my peers lacked. Reporters would come to interview my mother as our de facto spokesperson, and then turn to me with questions about the perspective of the Phelps grandchildren—the first Westboro generation to have grown up on the picket line. I believed our doctrines to be the very definition of goodness and righteousness—not tedious or burdensome—and I loved them with all the fervor my mother had been modeling since I was a child. For this is the love of God, that we keep his commandments: and his commandments are not grievous. Though I was always afraid I wasn’t sufficiently articulate to speak for the church, I never let that stop me from stepping up to the plate—and the more I spoke, the more I learned how to speak. I was ever eager to fulfill my duty both to exhort and to convince the gainsayers with sound doctrine, and that trend had continued into the social media age.
Thanks to our rising profile after the oral arguments, I was now receiving sometimes hundreds of tweets a day and posting dozens more of my own. Although we protested at Twitter’s San Francisco headquarters, I’d come to love the platform dearly: a place for me to spread our message in a way that didn’t require the distorting lens of a journalist who just couldn’t seem to get it, no matter how much effort I spent trying to explain. I discovered I was far more effective at pleading our cause directly to the people on Twitter, absent the influence of Bible-ignorant hacks who wielded professional cameras and microphones. After two decades on the picket line, I was twenty-five years old and a skilled defender of Westboro and its many controversial doctrines. This random guy was just an anonymous face in the crowd asking the same questions I’d answered hundreds of thousands of times before. “‘God hates fags’ not ‘I hate fags,’” I clarified for him. “We love them more than anyone.”

MEGAN AMRAM (@meganamram): cool name
MEGAN PHELPS-ROPER (@meganphelps): Thanks! Sometimes your parents give you a cool name, sometimes you go to fiery eternal torment for hating God & teaching sin. =(

Less than two weeks after the Anonymous attack, the Supreme Court published its opinion in Snyder v. Phelps, and the media circus surrounding the church ramped up a hundredfold. God had worked in the hearts of the justices, and we had prevailed against our adversaries. Had the Snyder lawsuit succeeded, we knew that the much-vaunted American right to freedom of speech would have become little more than window dressing: if one person can label another’s opinions on public issues “offensive” and then sue the speaker for millions of dollars in damages, what protection does the First Amendment offer? By that logic, a member of the KKK could sue a black protester for protesting a Klan meeting while promoting the “offensive” belief that racism is a societal evil. The Snyder lawsuit had to fail, because, as Chief Justice John Roberts wrote for the majority:

Westboro believes that America is morally flawed; many Americans might feel the same about Westboro. Westboro’s funeral picketing is certainly hurtful and its contribution to public discourse may be negligible. But Westboro addressed matters of public import on public property, in a peaceful manner, in full compliance with the guidance of local officials. The speech was indeed planned to coincide with Matthew Snyder’s funeral, but did not itself disrupt that funeral, and Westboro’s choice to conduct its picketing at that time and place did not alter the nature of its speech.
Speech is powerful. It can stir people to action, move them to tears of both joy and sorrow, and—as it did here—inflict great pain. On the facts before us, we cannot react to that pain by punishing the speaker. As a Nation we have chosen a different course—to protect even hurtful speech on public issues to ensure that we do not stifle public debate. That choice requires that we shield Westboro from tort liability for its picketing in this case.

Emboldened by our success, we announced that we would quadruple our protests of soldiers’ funerals. In the days and weeks that followed, I was more active on social media than ever before or since, so thankful to be one of God’s representatives on earth and utterly exultant that He had put a megaphone to the mouth of our tiny church. I used Twitter to bait celebrities with anti-gay messages, to publicly celebrate Japan’s Fukushima nuclear disaster, and to debate the merits of the Snyder case with anyone who would listen. Whether I was cooking dinner, sitting on an airplane, or standing at a protest holding two signs in one hand and my iPhone in the other, I spent every spare moment I could find answering thousands of users, whether they were curious, angry, confused, or mocking.


BRETT MICHAEL DYKES (@thecajunboy): Lil Wayne is making abstinence education videos now, apparently …
MEGAN PHELPS-ROPER (@meganphelps): With 1 in 4 U.S. girls aged 14–19 having an STD, abstinence is *clearly* the problem, @thecajunboy. Pssst: #GodHatesFornication!
BMD: Go fuck yourself.
MPR: Why yes—it HAS been too long since WBC’s been to [your area]! Picket ideas? You know who to tweet.;) #Obey


And in the midst of it all, him. Over the weeks, I started to notice his name and photo each time they appeared among the flood of messages I was receiving, though neither gave me any hint as to who he could be. His name was “FormerlyKnownAs,” his profile picture that iconic image of Robert Redford as Jay Gatsby, leaning against the yellow convertible; I studiously ignored the spike in my heart rate and the dopamine rush I experienced whenever I saw them. So many of those who messaged me were enraged—understandably so, given that we were disposed to celebrating the deaths of children and blaming their parents for the tragedies that took them—and while he was certainly perplexed by our doctrines, anger had no part in his response after that first tweet. Instead he lurked, his infrequent questions belying the fact that he was reading each and every word I posted. His careful attention was intimidating and intoxicating, and all the more so as a figure of him started to form in my mind: exceptionally witty, quietly dignified, deeply curious, and above all, respectful and kind. The thoughts he shared were never what I anticipated: reverent praise of my grammar, critiques of the font used on our picket signs, and literary and film recommendations as diverse as Marilynne Robinson’s Pulitzer Prize–winning novel Gilead and the comedy blockbuster The Hangover. Apart from his typical questions about the church, he was all over the board and never where I expected.
I relished confounding his expectations, too. Like many others, he’d arrived at my Twitter under the impression that my church was filled with hillbillies and rednecks, an assumption I was only too happy to dispel. Upon my trumpeting of our Supreme Court victory, he learned that my family is full of lawyers, and I learned that it was a profession he shared—another piece of the puzzle that I meticulously filed away. He was shocked to find that my grandfather had been honored by the NAACP for his civil rights work in Kansas. Still anonymous, he wrote this message to a researcher who was looking into the ways Westboro used Twitter:

I became aware of WBC via Anonymous. I immediately sent MPR a nasty tweet. She responded in a charming way. I was charmed. I wiki’d WBC which led me to wiki Fred Phelps. I learned that he, like me, was a lawyer. I learned that he was a civil rights pioneer in Kansas, which was contrary to what I expected. I studied more. During that study, WBC won a Supreme Court decision I didn’t realize was pending. Whether you love them or hate them or think they’re good or evil, you can’t deny that it’s a fascinating, complex American story. If MPR hadn’t sent a witty, charming response to a nasty tweet from me, I wouldn’t know the first thing about WBC, and I wouldn’t have written this to you. That’s the power of Twitter. That’s influence. That’s the power of an @.

Witty, he said. Charming. I found myself blushing at his compliments, but failed to recognize the deeper import of what he was saying. It was only much later that I noticed the pattern, that the dynamic he described had played itself out repeatedly during my time on Twitter—among many others, it happened with a friendly college student in Canada, a sassy start-up employee in Chicago, a hilarious Australian guy who tweeted political jokes, even an American soldier to whom I had sent a care package in Afghanistan. At the time I had been vaguely aware of the changes that communication on Twitter was working in me, but it was only in hindsight that its effects became clear. The 140-character limit caused me to drastically cut back on my use of insults, which Westboro members made a habit of stringing together in long, alliterative lists: “bombastic, blowhard, bigmouth, bimbo, bastard.” Not only was there no space for insults in tweets, there was also an almost immediate feedback loop: unlike with email, I could watch a Twitter conversation derail in real time whenever I included personally disparaging language. The exchange would swiftly devolve from a theological debate to a playground quarrel. It became clear to me that causing offense with needless ad hominem attacks did nothing to communicate our core message, and I learned to avoid it. Hostile tweeters became almost like a game to me, and I delighted in learning to use humor, pop culture, and self-deprecation to diffuse and disarm antagonism. To change the nature of the conversation and convey our message in a way that outsiders could better hear it. The tongue might be a fire, I was learning, but it didn’t always have to be.
“So, when do you drink the Kool-aid?” one guy tweeted at me.
“More of a Sunkist lemonade drinker, myself. =)” I told him.
By long forbearing is a prince persuaded, and a soft tongue breaketh the bone.
Somewhere along the line, my anonymous lawyer bragged about his Words With Friends prowess, and I impulsively responded with my username in a hashtag. Two days later, he started a match with me, and the game began in earnest.

I was about six when I first thought seriously about marriage. Gramps had spoken from the pulpit one Sunday morning about the foundation for proper marriage: serving the Lord together. Marrying an unbeliever was verboten, and for us, that meant only other Westboro members were permissible partners. Since the church was composed almost entirely of my immediate and extended family, it occurred to my child mind that if I were ever to marry, it would have to be someone from outside, someone who hadn’t grown up in this peculiar faith of ours. I’d been seeing outsiders on the picket line for about a year by then—angry, screeching, violent, wearers of neon muscle shirts and fanny packs—and I was afraid.
“What if I get married to someone who acts like a good person, but then it turns out they’re bad? Gramps says you can’t get divorced. What will happen to me, Mama?” I was clutching her hand as we walked down our street after school one sunny afternoon, my little tum churning with dread at the thought of being hoodwinked by one of Satan’s boys. I’d only just conjured this scenario, but my thoughts were already tumbling all over themselves, my tendency toward melodrama completely unhelpful. Instead of seeming like some far-off possibility, the danger felt real, immediate, pulsing from heart to limbs and back again.
“The Lord will keep you, little Meg.” My mama’s voice was gentle, reassuring. “He knows the hearts of all men. If you’re supposed to have a husband, the Lord knows how to make sure he’s a good one. He won’t let us be tricked.” Her quiet certainty was calming. She’s right, I thought. The Lord will take care of us. We have to trust Him. They were the words I always heard the adults repeating.
My tiny death grip on her palm must have given away how truly scared I was, because she shook her head, laughing indulgently, and went on: “And anyway, you won’t have to think about that for a long, long time.”

I can’t remember exactly when or how I learned what sex was, but I was still six when I discovered that it was how babies were made. My mom was pregnant with her seventh child, my baby sister Grace, and I gasped vociferously, with stark realization and something akin to horror. “So you have had sex with Dad!” I accused her. “Seven times!” I knew sex to be acceptable within the context of marriage, but only just; the practice was still highly questionable and suspect to my mind, and I couldn’t understand why anyone would risk it—especially my smart and pious parents.
I soon learned that sex wasn’t the only thing that could get you into trouble, though. “Lust,” too, was dangerous and forbidden. My mom explained it carefully to my siblings and me sitting around the living room during one of our daily Bible readings. “Lust is a strong desire for something you’re not entitled to. You cannot be said to ‘lust’ after your spouse, for instance, because that’s something you are entitled to. The word doesn’t apply!” I vaguely understood that the context here was boys and girls, but my mind went straight to my little sister’s Barbies. Bekah refused to let me play with them, but I’d always dreamed of combining our dolls into one giant collection, which I would then apportion between us as I deemed appropriate (the naked ones with the ratty hair and missing limbs would be hers, obviously). I strongly desired to take control of her toys; was this lust? I wasn’t positive, but Mom had already moved on, so it didn’t seem like the perfect time to ask.
“Then when lust hath conceived, it bringeth forth sin: and sin, when it is finished, bringeth forth death.” She was quoting James 1:15. “You need to understand this, children. Lust is the beginning of every sin, and death and Hell are the end of every sin. Every evil thing arises from lust. We have to be vigilant about it. Don’t think that you’re special or strong, that you can just go down a lustful path in your mind and not have it affect your actions and behavior. This is a truism: Then when lust hath conceived, it bringeth forth sin: and sin, when it is finished, bringeth forth death. Make no mistake: lust will bring sin, and sin will bring death. You have to cut it off, and not let it take root in your heart.”
She paired this verse with another, and they will be forever linked in my mind: Can a man take fire in his bosom, and his clothes not be burned? It’s one of the Proverbs, captivating in its simplicity. The imagery clearly hearkens back to Hell again, where most of our conversations eventually led.
The discussion continued one day when my mother came to my kindergarten class to have lunch with me. On our way to the cafeteria, she spotted my first-grade cousin walking down the far end of the nearly empty hallway. Mom suddenly seemed disturbed and disgusted. “The way she walks is so inappropriate!”
“What do you mean, Mama?”
“She swishes her butt when she walks. Do you see that? She does it on purpose. No one walks like that.”
I watched my cousin as she disappeared into the lunchroom, trying to see what my mother saw. As far as I could tell it was the way she’d always walked, and I said so, confused.
“No. She walks like that to get attention from boys.”
Ah, it dawned on me.
Lust.
Suddenly very aware of my gait, I began to walk stiffly, keeping my little hips as still as I could make them. I asked my mom if I did that sort of thing when I walked, too. She shook her head. “No. I’ll have to talk to her mom about it. I’m worried about that girl.”

As my childhood years passed, and then my teenage ones, ever more praise was heaped on virgin marriages, and ever more vilification on any relationship outside of that. There was no such thing as “dating” in this context. God hated fornication, and having dinner alone with an unrelated member of the opposite sex would inexorably lead to fornication—or at the very least, it had the appearance of evil, which we were strictly instructed to avoid. Even if a couple was engaged, there would be no kissing, and certainly no time to themselves, until after the vows. If they didn’t have a chaperone at all times, there was the appearance of evil: the presumption would be that the betrothed had been in flagrante, their undefiled status would be called into question, and the church would have to suss out exactly what had happened during the time in question.
And although marriages weren’t terribly frequent at Westboro, it seemed like there was never any shortage of such matters for the church to suss out. Before I was born and as I was growing up, several women in the church had relationships and children outside of marriage. These affairs were calamitous and fearsome to behold, their devastating consequences seared into my young psyche like a white-hot brand. I listened to the hushed conversations of the adults one evening, learning they centered around an aunt of mine who’d been wonderful and close with me since I was a babe; she’d take my siblings and me on drives to the park, recounting stories that sounded fascinating even though they were several levels above anything we could really grasp while our ages numbered in the single digits. I didn’t understand all that had gone on with her, but words like “shameful,” “deliberate,” “willful,” “… with him?” and “I can’t think of anything worse” were thrown around, and I knew they meant sex.
For if we sin wilfully after that we have received the knowledge of the truth, there remaineth no more sacrifice for sins, But a certain fearful looking for of judgment and fiery indignation, which shall devour the adversaries. The ominous warning, terror, and despair of this passage were all over my aunt’s face when it came time for the church to sit in judgment of her for the intolerable sin and havoc she’d wrought among the congregation. We filed into the church sanctuary and took our places in our usual pews, the atmosphere filled with a dreadful heaviness. For what seemed an excruciatingly long period, the adults soberly and dispassionately discussed the fate of this woman, whether she should be stripped of church membership in order to keep the church pure and to drive out the evil inside her. Concerning him that hath so done this deed … deliver such an one unto Satan for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. To be excluded from the church was a terrifying proposition, the worst fate imaginable for a member of Westboro—a sure sign that you weren’t one of God’s elect but a reprobate destined for Hell. If an excluded person found a way to convince the church that he’d truly repented, he could be granted membership again, but there were no guarantees. As it became clear that the church was leaning toward excluding her from membership—unless and until she found a way to sufficiently demonstrate her repentance to them—anguished sobs racked her, contorting her face with shame and desperation as she begged for mercy and forgiveness. Her young son, also, not yet a teenager, pleaded through tears that they not do this terrible thing to his mother. But the church body, undeterred by their supplications, voted her out with no further discussion.
In the wake of this trauma, the behavior of my cousin became petrifying to me. Jael, my dear friend the butt-swishing first-grader, grew into a coquettish middle-schooler, and the shenanigans that resulted were cause for great concern. Abstain from fleshly lusts, which war against the soul. She seemed to be constantly in trouble because of boys she was “messing around with.” In our lingo, this could mean just about anything from simple flirting to sex. I always figured it couldn’t have been more than a kiss in Jael’s case, though that was still a sin egregious and inexcusable, a flagrant display of lust and the appearance of evil. We saw these “innocent” flirtations as the beginnings of real danger that would end with the shame of being an unwed mother and the desolation of being voted out of the church. When Jael got detention for a silly incident that involved hurling a spit wad at a boy, we were all deeply worried for her soul. Her classmates from the church—my older brother and a few other cousins—were charged with keeping an eye on her at school and reporting any suspicious behavior.
The following year, I joined the middle school crowd and that responsibility fell to me, as well. A few weeks before I was set to start at my new school, I walked across our backyard and into the church. My siblings and I would take turns having sleepovers there with Gran and Gramps, often several times a week during the summer months. Gramps’s room was the master bedroom upstairs, but Gran usually slept in a recliner in the downstairs room with the fireplace. We would always join Gran and watch marathons of I Love Lucy, Bewitched, or, if we were unlucky, Bonanza. On this night, Gran and I stayed up late watching Lucy, and when the time came, she turned off the TV, I flipped off the light, and we each settled under our covers. To lie in the dark and talk with Gran—wise and soft-spoken, keeper of stories and resolver of spats—was a privilege. That night it was a quiet, considered admonition she had for me. “You’re such a good girl, Meg,” she half whispered across the room. “You’re a good friend. You’re such a blessing to your parents. You help your mom so much.” She was silent for a moment. “Please promise me you won’t ever change. A lot of people, when they get to be your age, start to change. They start getting into a lot of trouble.” I thought of Jael and felt myself beginning to panic. She was warning me, I realized, because I was on the cusp of dangerous territory. I felt the force and weight of her charge, assuring her over and over again that I would not change. That I would not be a burden to my parents. That I would watch out for myself and my loved ones. That I would be good.
Despite my fears, I settled into the rhythms of sixth grade without so very much trouble. Middle school made me feel official and grown up, but the very best part was getting to spend time with my older cousins. I cherished our newfound closeness, and so was completely thrown when, months into the school year, a mutual friend accidentally made reference to “Jael’s boyfriend” in my presence. How could I have missed this? The girl immediately tried to backtrack—it was widely known among our classmates that the Phelpses weren’t allowed to date—but it was too late. I was sick with worry and fear, but also pleased to have discovered valuable information that could help save my cousin from the clutches of this vicious sin. I colluded with other church members to surreptitiously question classmates about the dalliance, and then reported back to my mother that afternoon after school.
I don’t recall the consequences of this incident except as they related to me. There was joy at being the object of my mother’s pride; instead of following my cousin’s bad example or trying to hide her wrongdoing, I’d been responsible and cautious and was looking out for the soul of my friend. There was hope against hope that sweet Jael would be saved from her concupiscence. And there was determination to never allow myself to be in her position, to never repeat the mistakes of the dearly beloved women in our family. I never felt superior to them, no—on the contrary, the moral missteps of such strong, godly women made me fear all the more for the safety of my own soul. I was female, and therefore easily deceived, and I prayed that God would deliver me from such sinful thoughts and desires. My mom, my aunts, and my Gran warned me in mostly vague terms about the sensual sins that had befallen the most devout of women. And as with Gran, I heard such expectation and hope in their voices as they spoke to me: that I wouldn’t fall to the obstacles that had caused so many before me to stumble; that the standard was higher for me and my generation. With the Lord’s help, I would make absolutely certain that my own thoughts and behavior were above reproach.

As it turned out, I didn’t have much to worry about. From middle school through college, there was really no one in the church whom I could conceivably marry—it was still almost entirely my relatives—so I didn’t entertain any serious thoughts of relationships. I had hormones as a teenager, of course, and a couple of boys at school caught my eye—but in addition to being terrified of lust and of falling out of favor with God, I was a realist. We protested every single day in our hometown and across the country, and our church was universally hated for it. I understood that the likelihood of any of my classmates being interested in me was essentially nil—especially after we started protesting outside our high school during lunch period—and I also knew that the odds of any of them joining the church were even lower. I knew a hopeless situation when I saw one. I also knew that I was far too young to be thinking about boys anyway, so the whole idea was mostly off my radar.
I got older. A crew from the BBC came to Topeka to film their documentary about Westboro in 2006, the year I turned twenty. Louis Theroux, the wily but affable presenter, spent a great deal of time talking to me and the other young adult women in my family. He and the rest of the crew seemed fascinated by the fact that our church was populated almost entirely by the children and grandchildren of the only pastor it had ever had—an especially salient consideration given the dearth of potential spouses for us, the grandchildren. We would likely never marry or have children of our own, which Louis saw as a huge problem for us, both personally and as a church. To him, the desire for companionship was in the essential nature of humanity, and without it we young, vivacious women would grow to be bitter spinsters, old and alone. He pointed out that our doctrines and strict policy of marriage only to church members were against our interests as a church body, too; they effectively cut off new blood that the church would need to grow. We would all eventually die off without it, and then Westboro would be no more.
We dismissed Louis’s arguments as utter poppycock. First of all, we told him, only the basest of humanity is ruled by carnal lust. There is no true member of God’s church who is so lascivious as to need marriage, and certainly not one who would be willing to defy God and marry an unbeliever. Be ye not unequally yoked together with unbelievers: for what fellowship hath righteousness with unrighteousness? and what communion hath light with darkness? or what part hath he that believeth with an infidel? Wherefore come out from among them, and be ye separate, saith the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing. The Apostle Paul’s second letter to the Corinthians is infinitely clear: no matter the circumstances, a desire to marry outside the church is dispositive evidence of one’s lack of salvation.
Second, we argued that God is entirely sovereign and controls the minds of all humankind. Of course, He’d chosen to harden the hearts of the vast majority of them—that’s why our church was so small—but with God, all things are possible. If He so chose, he could easily bring any or all of us a husband or wife. They would become believers and join the church, and then they would be suitable spouses for a servant of the Lord.
Finally and most important, we were living in the last of the Last Days, and Jesus would soon return through the clouds and save His people and dismantle the foundations of the earth. Who cares about marriage when the world will imminently be destroyed by God?
But when Louis approached Jael with questions of marriage and the future, she didn’t respond with a Bible verse—just a gentle laugh at his ignorance and a rhetorical question or two of her own: “Are you kidding? Who is gonna marry us?!”
After so many years, Jael had become a realist, too.

At twenty-four, I had a major stumble. It was a short-lived infatuation with a young, foreign salesman who approached my seventeen-year-old sister, Grace, and me while we were walking through the mall (in a hurry, as always, because we couldn’t be out by ourselves for too long). He convinced us to let him do a demonstration on Grace’s hair of the curling iron he was selling, and we phoned home to get permission. The only reason we could even hope for a green light was that the salesman was Israeli. At that time, our church was exploring the book of Revelation, and many church members believed that we would be the instruments used by God to save 144,000 Jews. The whole doctrine was incredibly strange to me—it certainly wasn’t theology that I’d grown up with—but I wanted to understand it. I’d also never met an Israeli Jew, and he seemed different from the American Jews I’d met at pickets (which may have had something to do with the fact that I wasn’t holding a GOD HATES JEWS sign and singing an anti-Semitic parody of “Hatikvah,” but I digress). My mom was curious, too; it seemed like both of us were thinking something along the lines of “Maybe we’ll meet a saved Jew right here in Topeka!” So Grace and I got the go-ahead. Mom even told me to invite him and his colleague, also Israeli, to church on Sunday.
We sat there talking for about an hour while he worked through my sister’s impossibly long locks—a woman’s uncut hair being a sign of her obedience and subjection to God and to her father or husband. Looking back, there isn’t anything about this guy that I can point to as having been especially appealing. I could tell that he was interested in me, but more to the point, there was a slim chance that he could be saved—a hope I hadn’t dared to have for any guy outside the church in all my years. More than anything, the feeling I had sitting in that chair was simple possibility, and it was electrifying—like nothing I’d ever felt before.
The Israelis couldn’t make it to church two days later because of work, but they did come to Sunday dinner at my house. When they walked in with homemade falafel, the sweet, spicy scent of barbecue already permeated the kitchen. After dinner, we sat around the living room all evening—the salesmen and my parents and siblings—talking about God and Judaism and Israel and the Bible. Hebrew was their first language, which made Google Translate a necessity and deep discussion well-nigh impossible. Neither side walked away convinced by the other’s beliefs, but it was a noteworthy conversation—less because of its substance and more because of its tone. It was contemplative rather than contentious, which wasn’t generally the norm when it came to Westboro members and theological debates.
A few weeks later, I was out for a solo bike ride around the campus of my alma mater, when suddenly the Israeli pulled up next to me in an old car and said I should come see him. I told him I couldn’t, but he pointed toward a nearby apartment building and said I’d only be there for just a minute. The tiny spark of excitement that shot through me was more than dwarfed by an overwhelming sense of foreboding and dread; I felt physically ill. I pedaled on for a moment, then turned around and headed toward his building. I tried to maintain some sense of propriety by resolving that I wouldn’t go into his apartment. This was already the appearance of evil, but I felt that going inside would be unforgivable, my chastity essentially assumed to be forfeit.
It was early evening, but the sun was still hot, the extreme humidity of our Kansas summer still stifling. I found him sitting in the shade of the apartment building when I pulled into the parking lot. It was late July by then, and I was halfway through a fourteen-mile ride; beads of sweat were forming and falling all over my skin, deeply tanned that far into the season. I got off my bike and sat down on the curb next to him. We talked for a minute. I showed him photos of the results of my own amateur attempts with the curling iron. He laughed and then stood up and said we should go inside where it was cool. I demurred, my heart pounding steadily in my ears. It felt like the world was moving in slow motion.
Just then, the other salesman darted outside and teasingly grabbed my little black backpack, absconding with it back into the apartment. It was a flirtatious move, but I protested angrily—my phone and wallet were in there, and I couldn’t leave without it. I followed them into the apartment, the corrosive acid in my stomach seeming to multiply with each step until I thought I would vomit. The blast of air conditioning that hit me when I walked in was welcome, immediately bringing goose bumps to my skin, but it was almost completely dark inside. The lights were off and the curtains drawn, so it took my eyes a minute to adjust from the brightness outside. His roommate had thrown my bag into his bedroom, so I followed him there. He sat on the bed. I pleaded with him to just give me the bag, but he insisted I sit down next to him, facing him. I sat. He said sweet things I wanted to believe—that I was beautiful, that he cared about me—and then tried to kiss me. I evaded awkwardly, tucking into myself and bringing my arms up as if to protect my face.
No. I could not cross this line.
He tried again, and again I evaded. I stood up. He gave me my bag. I let him hug me. We walked outside. He hugged me again. And then I was off.
I biked straight home feeling sick and shaky and tortured with guilt. I cried as I rode, overcome with shame and panic that God would curse me for what I’d done. I had let my whole family down. My parents. The church. Myself. I was no longer unsullied. It wasn’t just my actions that were so exceedingly sinful; it was the indefensible thoughts that had led me to them. But I say unto you, That whosoever looketh on a woman to lust after her hath committed adultery with her already in his heart. According to Jesus, the fact that I’d had those feelings in the first place made me guilty of adultery.
I felt broken, but I tried to clean myself up as best I could, to pretend like nothing had happened. When he emailed a few days later—“You don’t understand how I think about you all day long.”—I couldn’t stand it anymore. I showed the message to my mom and begged for help and forgiveness. She was understanding and kind, but I thought I saw doubt in her eyes when I explained that I’d only hugged him twice, that I hadn’t done anything else (why would I feel so guilty and afraid if that was all we’d done?), and that pained me all the more. She sat down beside me and read me a passage from the book of Isaiah: Neither let the eunuch say, Behold, I am a dry tree. For thus saith the LORD unto the eunuchs that keep my sabbaths, and choose the things that please me, and take hold of my covenant; Even unto them will I give in mine house and within my walls a place and a name better than of sons and of daughters: I will give them an everlasting name, that shall not be cut off. My mama wasn’t excusing my behavior, but she was trying to tell me that she understood, trying to help me find comfort in the very likely scenario that I would be a “eunuch” for the rest of my life, trying to help me see that having a place in the house of God—His church—was better than having a husband or sons or daughters. She was preparing me to accept that this was a sacrifice I might be required to make for the kingdom of God’s sake, as several of my aunts had been called to do. I squeezed her hand and cried quietly, something I found myself doing each time I encountered that verse thereafter, without ever quite knowing why—just a nebulous, fleeting sense of loss that I neglected to pursue.
It was even worse when my oldest brother, Sam, called to talk to me. He’s seven years older than me, and I’d always admired and looked up to him as a near-perfect example of a true servant of God. He kindly chided me, and told me that I couldn’t pursue this. That by wanting something that God hadn’t given me, I was murmuring against Him. That the people in the Bible who’d murmured against God had been destroyed. That I needed to get back to single-hearted fidelity to God and put away this sin. Whether or not I ever got married was God’s decision alone, Sam reminded me. If He chose not to give me a husband, then I should be thankful, because then it would be my happy lot to serve Him without being encumbered by the cares of this life. He reminded me of the Apostle’s words: The unmarried woman careth for the things of the Lord, that she may be holy both in body and in spirit: but she that is married careth for the things of the world, how she may please her husband. We don’t get to be mad at God for not giving us what we want, Sam said. How dare we? God is Perfect, Sovereign, and Just—and we are His to do with as He pleases.
Of course it was true, all of it. I knew all the words by heart. Sam was right, and I was so grateful to my big brother for bringing them to my remembrance, for helping guide me back to sanity and away from sin.
We got past it. I didn’t bike by myself anymore. Of my own accord, I installed a tracking app on my phone so that I could show my mom where I’d gone if I ever had to leave the house unaccompanied. I wanted to be on the strait and narrow path Jesus spoke of, the one to salvation and eternal life. I wanted to prove—to myself and to my family—that I wasn’t going to continue down a path that would lead me to Hell and destruction. I would pray, and the Lord would help me. I would be vigilant. I would stay close to home. I would avoid going anywhere alone. I would keep my distance from anyone who could trip me up.
I would be safe.

My phone vibrated briefly and played the already-familiar trill of the Words With Friends tone. I glanced at the screen and read the notification, though I knew what it said:
“Your move!”
It’s vaguely suggestive, which I noted and then pretended I hadn’t—as I had every day for the past week we’d been playing. It happened the same way each day: there was no play during the daylight hours, and then at some point in the evening, he’d make a move in the game and we’d start to chat. He’d question me about theology, ask me to explain more about the pickets and verses I’d posted on Twitter that day, and make vague references to his life as a “country lawyer.” I’d answer his questions, describe Westboro’s history and doctrines, and tell him about walking out of the Kansas City premiere of Kevin Smith’s film Red State. (Smith had taken to Twitter to invite me to review the Westboro-inspired film onstage after the showing, and my parents had agreed to allow it. But when we caught sight of two former church members—including my brother Josh, whom I hadn’t seen in seven years—my mom sensed a setup and the whole group of us bailed.) We made our moves so quickly that we’d get through an entire game each night, and then begin again with a new game the next evening.
In all our conversations, I was careful to maintain propriety; I still knew absolutely nothing for certain about this man—including whether he even was a man. I was hyper-aware that he could be a journalist or otherwise trying to entrap me, to trick me into revealing some titillating piece of information about “The Most Hated Family in America.” I wasn’t terribly worried about this possibility, though; I wrote everything with the assumption that it could be published in a newspaper—exactly as I would respond on Twitter, but without the 140-character limit. “If you ever have a question about whether it’s appropriate to say something,” my mother always said, “just add the word judge to the end of it—as if you were addressing a judge in the middle of a courtroom.” I took my mom’s advice to heart, but I was still amazed at how quickly I had fallen into this pattern with my anonymous friend—and in complete denial about how much I was coming to crave my interactions with him.
There was also something illusory about talking with a person who was faceless and (presumably) far away. Before Twitter, friendship with outsiders had always been easy to avoid; I’d chat with classmates during school, but since there was no interaction outside of that, the relationships always fizzled. All I’d ever had to do was keep a little distance from them, and outsiders would always be at arm’s length, never close enough to hurt me. And when physical separation failed, like at the salesman’s apartment that summer day, I was still mostly protected; as a child, I had donned guilt, shame, and fear—of God, of Hell, of the church—and I wore them like an impenetrable cloak that could never be shed.
But this was not like that. It felt different. Is it even real when half of the conversation comes from a person completely shrouded in shadow? Is it real when the words themselves and all evidence of their existence disappear forever after just a few hours? Lying prone on my bed in my pajamas, perched on my elbows with phone in hand, it was easy to believe that it was not—that the vast distance between us made me safe.
Distance, as I would come to learn, is a relative concept in matters of the heart.

“You’re too much.”
It became a frequent refrain of his, and one that I adored (vastly superior to the other expression he was so fond of: “You’re okay.”). After playing and chatting for a few weeks, I understood this saying to mean that my attention to detail and ridiculous enthusiasm at the most insignificant of occurrences were a joy to him—or, as he’d put it himself a few times, “I love the way your mind works.” This was a shock, and touched me in ways I could not have anticipated. I’d been getting in trouble all my life for talking too much and too fast, rambling on and on about subjects and ideas that almost no one else cared about—but this anonymous stranger wanted to hear them. Which is how I ended up telling him silly stories like:
“This morning I was trying to think of an economic principle to describe a situation. I learned it in Microecon, but couldn’t remember the name of the principle. Eventually, I did. I just got to my bed and found an exam from Microecon. The one with the answer I was looking for (principle of diminishing marginal utility). Haven’t seen this in 5 years, and have no idea how it got here. No one even knew I was looking for the answer. Weird stuff!”
As much as I enjoyed sharing my stories with him, I wanted to hear his stories, too—but it seemed hopeless. I was already consumed with curiosity, and his refusals to open up just made me all the more determined. Since he always balked when I asked questions—especially ones that might reveal more of his identity—I stopped asking (or at least reduced my questions by half; I was truly desperate, though I couldn’t allow myself to admit it). It was clear that my fear that he was an insidious deceiver had a twin: his fear that our friendship—the deepest friendship I’d ever had outside of Westboro—would reflect poorly on him if it became known in his small community. I realized I just had to be patient and not too probing, to let him share what he wanted when he wanted.
“Do you play an instrument?” I asked him one day.
“No, but I have DirecTV.”
I found him ridiculously clever.
As the weeks and then months passed, my patience paid off. In addition to the information I’d already gleaned, I discovered that he was from a very small town (though not in Nebraska, I was relieved to learn; I still harbored many hard feelings for the state after police officers in Bellevue arrested my mother for lawfully protesting). I knew he was somewhat older than my twenty-five years—early thirties, I guessed. His family had always had a farm, but his parents were professionals: a social worker and a nursing professor. His only sibling, a brother, lived in Chicago with his wife and three children. His family was of Norwegian descent, and he was very tall, with blond hair and blue eyes. I even got part of his name: his initials, C.G. His fear of being connected to WBC made even more sense when I discovered that he was an elected official. I didn’t like his reticence, but I could see where he was coming from.
Most of our discussions revolved around Westboro and theology, which he wasn’t terribly familiar with. I tried to educate him, but no matter how tenaciously I defended our positions, he just couldn’t get past some of them—especially the funeral protests. “But what about the family?” he would press me. My answer to this question sounded more and more hollow as time went by, but I refused to admit how uneasy—almost guilty—this line of questioning was making me feel. I argued the position I’d believed since I was a kid: that the definition of love was “truth,” and that any expression of truth was, by definition, loving. Truth was love regardless of context, target, or tone—even when it involved holding a sign that read THANK GOD FOR DEAD SOLDIERS on the sidewalk near a military funeral, while singing praises to the homemade bombs that killed them. C.G. strongly disagreed, and it became a point of contention that came up more often than the rest of his objections. When I wanted to talk about commandments and truth, C.G. was focused on humility, gentleness, compassion. To him, our message and methods clearly lacked these qualities—no matter how truthful we believed our words to be.

I’ve commented on the signs/picketing several times. You’ve never given quarter to any real discussion. (They’re biblically supported, etc.) I’ve said and continue to believe that it’s just BS designed to gather attention. I understand that you need attention to deliver your message; however, I’ve never encountered a family as intelligent or creative as yours.
You are carrying those signs because of circumstances 20 years ago in a city park and subsequent momentum.
You can do better.

I had been raised to view life as a battle between good and evil, and I knew that every person fit into one of those two categories. “There is only Jacob or Esau! Elect or reprobate!” as my mother would say. C.G. didn’t see it that way. He suggested a third group: people who were decent, but not religious. Why would God condemn people who had lived decently in the world? In truth, C.G. seemed to find shades of nuance and complexity in every situation—even when it meant reversing himself on opinions he’d previously expressed in strong terms. I found this tendency perplexing at first—as if I could never know for sure what he was really thinking—but I soon came to admire this quality, too. He was always reevaluating, never so committed to a position that he couldn’t assimilate new evidence.
As I came to appreciate him more and more, it became distressing to hear of his distress. When Amy Winehouse passed away that summer, my family celebrated: she was a whore and a drug addict, and her death was God’s punishment. But like so many others who filled my Twitter feed, C.G. lamented her early demise—a tragic loss of life and the beauty that her immense talent had brought into the world. How very young twenty-seven was. When a far-right terrorist murdered seventy-seven in a car bombing of Oslo and subsequent attack on a youth summer camp, church members rejoiced again. “My entire Facebook wall is shattered Norwegian innocence,” C.G. told me. He simply could not imagine telling the parents of murdered children to PRAY FOR MORE DEAD KIDS. I insisted to C.G. that God was good and that all His judgments were righteous. I quoted verses wherein God laughs at the calamity of unbelievers because they rejected Him. Because I have called, and ye refused; I have stretched out my hand, and no man regarded; I also will laugh at your calamity; I will mock when your fear cometh. But watching my family track the rising body count with glee, I felt mournful.
The truth was that I had started to feel sad in response to tragedies even when C.G. wasn’t there to prompt me. On Twitter, I came across a photo-essay about a famine in Somalia, bursting into tears at the sight of the first image: a tiny emaciated child. My mother heard and immediately walked over to my desk, asking what was wrong. I pointed to the photo on my screen and shook my head. “Would you send me that link, hon?” she said eagerly, “I’m going to write a GodSmack about it!” The disparity between my response and my mother’s gave me pause, but she didn’t seem to notice. She was already caught up in composing a celebratory blog post. In the past, this discrepancy would have made me wonder what was wrong with me, but now I thought of the prophet Elisha, weeping at his prophecy of the destruction of Israel. As I watched my mother’s fingers fly over the keys, a small part of me began to wonder if there was something wrong with Westboro.
I couldn’t acknowledge any of this to C.G., of course, or even to myself. Instead I quoted Bible verses and insisted that he needed to stop substituting his judgments for God’s.
When our discussions became thorny like this, as they inevitably did, he directed us back to music, books, movies. He introduced me to David Foster Wallace and Norwegian cookies, writer and comedian Jake Fogelnest, and the music of John Roderick, Blind Pilot, the Avett Brothers, and Foster the People. They became special to me for the simple fact that they’d come from him, but I also discovered that I really enjoyed them, too. I didn’t want to forget anything he told me, so I started recording everything in a Field Notes Brand notebook—the notebook itself being another item he’d introduced me to. He was a hipster through and through—I’d never known one before—and I quickly came to love all things I-heard-about-this-cool-new-group-months-ago. I was saturated in his digital presence, even though we were worlds apart.
Throughout it all, we approached each other with the deliberate caution one might employ in the presence of a dangerous, frightened animal; a single false step could be one’s undoing, or it might send the beast hightailing it into obscurity, never to exploit another Triple Word Score again. This sense that so much was at stake with each word was unwavering, almost palpable, and the thrill of it was combustible. There was no thought of speaking openly or directly about any feelings we might be developing, because to do so would be to acknowledge that this was about more than just God, and that would mean the end of it. And yet the subtext was always there, simmering just beneath conscious thought; I saw it, and I refused to see it, limerence disguised by equivocation and the purposefully easy cadence of our conversations. It was in the words we chose to deploy on the game board (“UNREQUITED”). It was in the songs and lyrics we shared (I’ve put no one else above us / We’ll still be best friends when all turns to dust). It was in the way we mocked each other with doting nicknames masquerading as insults (“circus monkey,” “old man”). It was in the literary quotes we presented without comment or preamble (“I am also inclined to overuse the word ‘old,’ which actually has less to do with age, as it seems to me, than it does with familiarity. It sets a thing apart as something regarded with a modest, habitual affection. Sometimes it suggests haplessness or vulnerability. I say ‘old Boughton,’ I say ‘this shabby old town,’ and I mean that they are very near my heart”). We were offering the words of writers and journalists, musicians and comedians, in order to convey what fear and decorum prevented us from saying ourselves.
I never allowed myself to imagine it, but it would be foolish to deny the secret hope that I came to harbor: that he could be mine someday. That he would eventually rip off the mask and appear at church one Sunday morning. That was the only way it could happen, of course; he’d have to join Westboro. I knew this was the only way, and I did what I could—keeping my words as disciplined and proper as I could make them—to sway him in that direction. In the subtlest of ways, I was trying to convince him of the rightness of our doctrines, the necessity of the protests, and the magnificence of life at the church. I never directly encouraged him to come to Topeka. Westboro had always frowned on attempting conversions; we didn’t want to guilt or cajole people into joining our ranks, because we believed conversion was God’s job alone. Still, I insinuated that it was the right move—and because he was responding with curiosity instead of condemnation, I continued to hope. I told several church members about him, even, as honestly as I could bring myself to be. I didn’t tell them he was the most captivating person I’d ever known. I didn’t tell them I loved my conversations with him more than just about any other part of my day. I didn’t tell them what he had promised me when I worried aloud that he would one day decide I was evil and stop talking to me (“I never will unless you want me to”). Since I was hiding the depth of my infatuation even from myself, it wasn’t so very difficult to hide it from the rest of my family, too.
The latent dream of my waking hours became impossible to ignore one night in late September. Seven months of these conversations had left me impossibly intrigued and altogether obsessed, and as I slept, I dreamed. In the dream, I’m standing on the driveway outside my house one summer Saturday; the grass is a vibrant green, the neighborhood alive with activity, and the noonday sun is beating down unmercifully—just like I like it. A black car with darkly tinted windows pulls up beside me, and a tall, blond man opens the door and steps out of the backseat on the driver’s side. I can’t see his face and we’ve never met, but I know his name: Chad Garrett. Suddenly I’m on the other side of the block, on the front lawn of the church itself. There are church members all around working on maintenance—mowing the lawns and cleaning the inside of the building and playing with the kids out back—but I’m looking for him. He comes around the corner looking for me, too, and we’re alone for a moment. He walks over and embraces me, his hands tangling in my curls as he holds me against him. I’m keenly aware that we’re on the church’s security cameras, and I know I’ll be in trouble when everyone finds out, but I can’t bring myself to stop. I want this so badly. I’ve waited so long for him. It is undeniable.
When I awoke, I was shaking. I could still feel his hands in my hair. It was September 30, and I spent the day fighting back tears, my stomach constantly on the verge of spilling its contents, though it was empty. When he started a game that night, I told him I couldn’t talk to him anymore, or ever again. That I was deleting Words With Friends. We went back and forth about the whys and the wherefores for a little while, but I knew I was right. It had become undeniable.
This could not be. It would destroy me, body and soul, just like God had promised.
Then when lust hath conceived, it bringeth forth sin: and sin, when it is finished, bringeth forth death. Can a man take fire in his bosom, and his clothes not be burned?
I’d already let this ungodly affection for an unbeliever take root in my heart. If I didn’t rip it out with both hands, I would fall away and lose everything—my family, my friends, my whole life in this world—and in the world to come I’d be tormented in Hell for all of eternity, where the worm that consumes your flesh never dies and the fire is never quenched.
I didn’t imagine it was possible for this to be any more gut-wrenching than it already was, but I was swiftly corrected when the messages kept coming:

You know I love you. You know I do. It’s not just the idea of you. I know you.


You also know I’m not coming to Topeka.

My heart hit the floor with a sickening thud. It was what I’d unconsciously ached to hear for so many long months, followed by what I’d feared was true all along. I thought bitterly of Jack Boughton, a character from Gilead, the first book he’d ever recommended to me: “I think hope is the worst thing in the world. I really do. It makes a fool of you while it lasts. And then, when it’s gone, it’s like there’s nothing left of you at all.”
I hated myself.
Just before I deleted the app, he said, “South Dakota.”
It took me less than two minutes to find his name. On a list of South Dakota State’s Attorneys, there it was: “Chad Fjelland, Clark County.” C.G.’s username included that foreign letter combination—“F/j”—and I was sure this had to be him. I looked him up on Google and found a photo: there he is, sitting in an office at a big wooden desk with papers strewn about, law books filling the shelves against the far wall. He’s wearing a white button-up shirt, his tie thrown casually over his shoulder. I stared for a minute, feeling so strange to finally have a face.
I had to cut him out of my life forever, but first I had to know more. I wanted to know if he’d been honest. Online research had always been a strength of mine, so I spent a few minutes using my talents to uncover as much about him as I could, to see if he’d told me the truth. My mind swept through seven months of talk and came to rest on three data points that could possibly be confirmed independently: the size of the community he lived in and two deaths that had occurred there.
First, I looked up the funeral home’s website and searched through the obituaries. It only took a moment to find what I was looking for, and my heart swelled a little.
He’d told me the truth.
“Clark, SD” was my next search term. Population: 1,139.
Truth.
I felt frantic, pathetic, and out of control. I was entering true stalker territory, but I couldn’t stop; I paid $6.95 for a public records search.

POSSIBLE ALIASES: Chad G Fjelland.

“C. G.” Truth.

AGE: 39.

Older than I’d believed—fourteen years my senior—but he’d never told me otherwise. Truth.

MARRIAGE INDEX: No Records Found.

The most important part. Truth.
There was a list of addresses and phone numbers, but they meant nothing to me. I sat in the empty office staring at my computer screen for a long time. In the span of twenty minutes I’d gone from total ignorance to stalker-level scrutiny, and I finally had answers. I had a name and a face, proof that I’d been conversing with a real man who really existed in the real world. His name was Chad, even, just as I’d dreamed.
And now he was gone forever.
I crawled into bed and cried until I slept.

I tried to undo it all the next night, to take back my insistence that we never speak again.
No, he said, we couldn’t talk anymore. It had all become too much.
I agreed. What else could I do?
I didn’t tell him I’d hunted him down and discovered his identity, but I did tell him I’d dreamed the name “Chad Garrett.” I didn’t know whether the middle name was correct, because the records search had only said “G.” Within half an hour, he’d sent me an email: a list confirming all the personal data I’d found the day before and more. The only thing that didn’t match was his age.
“Age 38.”
I shrugged it off. The public records search must’ve been based on the year, and his birthday just hadn’t come yet this year. Our age difference was unexpected, but by then, I just couldn’t bring myself to care.
And anyway, my eyes kept returning to the first line of the email:
“Chad Garrett Fjelland.”
Chad Garrett. Chad Garrett. Could it possibly be that my dream had been right? It felt like a sign from God. It gave me hope that maybe the rest of my dream would come true someday, too.
He said, “Believing in your heart that you’ll always be anonymous, and then to give that up … I think that maybe that’s really the only way that a human being can share their heart. I never planned on surrendering that anonymity. You have what’s left of mine. Just never hurt me.”
It was late. He made the last play of the game and won.
Ever the tease, he said, “Finishing second in a two-person word game only hurts when you’re better at making words. Here’s three: goodbye, dear Megan.”
Ever the know-it-all, I corrected his grammar: “Here *are* three.”
“You passed the test,” he said. “Unchanged from the day I ‘met’ you. Unchanged.”
For the second night in a row, I cried myself to sleep.

Months went by. I was depressed and missed him terribly for a while. I came to hate the Internet, because I couldn’t ever get away from him. He’d deleted his Twitter account—my Gatsby was gone for good—but there was a new one whose tweets and favorites I checked obsessively for months after we stopped talking. And then there was his Spotify account. His Instagram. His Facebook, though he didn’t friend me. But even apart from the Internet, he seemed always near at hand. His hipster music began to play on mainstream radio stations, eventually becoming fodder for Westboro parodies. My brothers had taken a liking to his little Field Notes notebooks, too, and I loved and hated the sight of them strewn about the house. Pathetic.
Eventually I lost hope. Life went back to normal, but it was grayer than before. I’d finally seen what I was missing, and my world felt impoverished without it. Without him.
It got easier with time, but I woke up one morning the following June feeling altogether desolate. A dream again, though I couldn’t remember it. The house was silent so early in the morning—most of its eleven inhabitants were still asleep—and I traipsed down the stairs to find my mama sitting in our office in her pajamas, her face lit up by her computer monitor. She looked over at me with a wide smile that morphed into maternal concern when she saw that I’d been crying. She rose immediately and hurried over to put her arms around me, rubbing circles on my back. “What is it, sweet doll?” she asked softly. I couldn’t talk through the tears, and she just held me tight for a long moment. Finally I managed to choke out between sobs, “I just feel so alone sometimes. I didn’t know it was possible to be around so many people and feel so alone.”
She squeezed me and didn’t let go. She understood. “Oh, love bug.” She was so gentle. “The arm of the Lord is not shortened. He will comfort you. He does comfort you. I love you. We have a wonderful life.”
She was right. She had always been right. Outsiders had scoffed at the long years of my mother’s anti-lust entreaties, the hysterical ravings of a Puritanical sex-obsessed hypocrite: “Really?” they’d ask, “God is going to send you to Hell for going on a date? What exactly is the harm?” But they knew better. The truth was memorialized everywhere from Leo Tolstoy’s Anna Karenina to Leonard Cohen’s “Hallelujah,” King David’s gaze lingering on Bathsheba as she bathed on the roof, Her beauty and the moonlight overthrew you. Chance encounters igniting obsessions that shatter into heartache. The most pitiful part was that mine hadn’t even needed a face or a body to root its hemlock inside me. He was just words on a screen, and more than half a year had passed since I’d said goodbye to him. Can a man take fire in his bosom and his clothes not be burned?
I squeezed my mother and buried my face in her shoulder.




