






9. Lift Up Thy Voice


Head Full of Doubt / Road Full of Promise
“There’s no fresh start in today’s world. Any twelve-year-old with a cell phone could find out what you did. Everything we do is collated and quantified. Everything sticks.”
Don’t act surprised that I’m quoting Batman. At WBC, reciting lines from pop culture is par for the course. And why not? The sentiments they express are readily identifiable by the masses—and shifting their meaning is as easy as giving them new context. So put Selina Kyle’s words in a different framework:
In a city in a state in the center of a country lives a group of people who believe they are the center of the universe; they know Right and Wrong, and they are Right. They work hard and go to school and get married and have kids who they take to church and teach that continually protesting the lives, deaths, and daily activities of The World is the only genuine statement of compassion that a God-loving human can sincerely make. As parents, they are attentive and engaged, and the children learn their lessons well.
This is my framework.
Until very recently, this is what I lived, breathed, studied, believed, preached—loudly, daily, and for nearly 27 years.
I never thought it would change. I never wanted it to.
Then suddenly: it did.
And I left.
Where do you go from there?
I don’t know, exactly. My sister Grace is with me, though. We’re trying to figure it out together.
There are some things we do know.
We know that we’ve done and said things that hurt people. Inflicting pain on others wasn’t the goal, but it was one of the outcomes. We wish it weren’t so, and regret that hurt.
We know that we dearly love our family. They now consider us betrayers, and we are cut off from their lives, but we know they are well-intentioned. We will never not love them.
We know that we can’t undo our whole lives. We can’t even say we’d want to if we could; we are who we are because of all the experiences that brought us to this point. What we can do is try to find a better way to live from here on. That’s our focus.
Up until now, our names have been synonymous with “God Hates Fags.” Any twelve-year-old with a cell phone could find out what we did. We hope Ms. Kyle was right about the other part, too, though—that everything sticks—and that the changes we make in our lives will speak for themselves.
Megan and Grace
February 6, 2013

As I flew back to Rapid City from New York, my eyes traced the final version of the “statement” again and again, until I was on the verge of vomiting. I knew that the only people who might care about these paragraphs were my family and a handful of curious Twitter followers, but I was still terrified of how they would be received. Public apologies in the age of social media could be brutal, every word parsed to ensure that no unacceptable sentiment remained in the offending party—and anything less than full repudiation of one’s “sins” would exacerbate the public flogging. Twitter mobs could tear a person’s reputation to shreds, demanding that they lose their job over an errant tweet or a joke that didn’t land—transgressions that were far less egregious than the dedicated campaign of condemnation in which I had been a willing participant for many years.
My apology was not a blanket condemnation of Westboro, a desperate plea for forgiveness, or a complete recanting of all my previous words and deeds. As I’d stood weeping and packing the day I left the church, Jael had insisted that these were my only options—that the world would make my life a living Hell otherwise. But even though they might have seemed like better strategies, I could not bring myself to employ them. This apology would not be for show. I would not begin this new life guided by expedience over truth. Regardless of the response, I could only be honest and hope for the best.
I had put agonizing thought into writing the words that would be published the following morning, to be sure they conveyed exactly what I felt, meant, and believed in that moment. It seemed to me that part of the enormous disconnection between Westboro and the rest of the world resulted from how we communicated. We had long invited confusion and hostility with language and methods that were deliberately grievous, provocative, and recondite. “Westboro is responsible for their own PR,” a friend told me one day, articulating a sentiment I had found so frustrating after I joined Twitter: that the church’s refusal to consider how our words and actions would be construed by our targets had caused much unnecessary pain for everyone involved. Why were we endlessly translating our signs and behaviors so that outsiders could understand them? Why didn’t we just begin our efforts by speaking with clarity, gentleness, reasonableness? Except ye utter by the tongue words easy to be understood, how shall it be known what is spoken? for ye shall speak into the air.
Honesty and good intentions weren’t worth much, I decided, if they were lost in translation.
To ensure that mine wouldn’t be, I had turned to a group of family members and new friends. In the multitude of counsellers there is safety. Among these were two writers I had met while they’d been visiting Westboro for research, and with whom I had maintained friendly communication via Twitter after their departures. Daniel Shannon and Jeff Chu were both incredibly kind, both gay, and both living in New York. I spoke with them by phone from the inn’s living room, but by chance, I had the opportunity to visit them in person—another occasion to push back at the Us/Them divide. As one of very few ex-members of Westboro who had chosen to be open about her experiences, my cousin Libby had been invited to New York to be interviewed on the Today Show and Anderson Cooper’s Anderson Live at the end of January. She asked me to accompany her for moral support, but when the producers pressed me to join her for the interviews, I insisted that it was impossible. I could not imagine standing in front of an audience—not now, not ever.
Away from the studios, I arranged for us to meet Daniel for dinner in Manhattan, and then Jeff and his husband, Tristan, for coffee in Brooklyn the following morning. We spoke of Daniel’s atheism and Jeff’s Christianity, and how strange it all felt, this transition from picketing gays in Topeka to brunching together in New York. Like so much of this new world, it was head-spinning. Watching Jeff and Tristan interact in the warm light of the diner, I was surprised to realize that I had no bad feelings about their relationship. They reminded me a bit of my parents, teasing and doting on each other. “Jeffy,” Tristan called him. The situation felt awkward only because it was new and foreign, and the only trace of negativity in me was a sense of betrayal: that my mother would be disappointed to know that I no longer felt that disgust she’d been describing to reporters all my life. “When you think of these fags, there’s something that just rises up inside you and says”—and here she would bellow—“yuck! You all know it!” But I felt no such thing—and I doubted she would have if not for her own upbringing.
When I shared my epiphany about interpretation with Jeff, he said, “That’s one thing I have never understood about your family. They’re all lawyers, right? The U.S. Constitution was written some two hundred years ago in essentially modern English, and there’s so much disagreement about how the U.S. Supreme Court should interpret and apply those words today. The Bible was written thousands of years ago in languages no one speaks anymore … and somehow, Westboro alone has figured out its one true meaning?” Articulated that way, the arrogance of our position seemed even more incomprehensible. In court, Margie’s job was to present and defend her interpretation of the facts and the law before a judge, who would hear all sides before making a final decision, which was subject to review by higher courts. But when it came to the purported Word of God, in all its complexity, we considered our judgment to be so reliable as to merit absolute confidence, so unquestionable that we could insist that all of humankind follow it. I shook my head and inwardly cringed. Coming face-to-face with my arrogance, aggressive in its misplaced certainty, was a special sort of shame.
When my flight landed in Rapid City, I picked up some essentials at Walmart—peanut butter, chocolate, apples, and English muffins—and then pointed my car to Deadwood, my little sister, and our new friends. Laura had convinced us to audition for a play at the local theater, and so—less than twenty-four hours before our scheduled return to Kansas in mid-January—Grace had agreed to stay in South Dakota. The spring semester had been set to begin the very next day, and we had scrambled to remove her from all of her Topeka classes, exchanging them for online coursework that would allow us some distance from Westboro. I would interview for a job working with Dustin at TDG—as a public relations assistant, ironically, not so different from work I’d done for Westboro—and Grace and I would stay in Deadwood at least until the play’s final performance. I was elated, and the promise I received from Chad made me feel all the more hopeful.


CHAD: You’ll be back in SD. I’ll figure out the math and approach the chalkboard. I promise.


After unloading the groceries, I found Grace in the attic and told her the plan: the statement would go up the following morning on a new blogging platform called Medium, along with a short article Jeff had written while I was in New York. “Your statement actually creates more questions than it answers,” he had told me. “If you don’t explain a bit more about why you left, it will leave people to speculate and fill in the blanks on their own.”
I watched as my sister read over both documents. She seemed so calm about it all. Poised. Graceful, I thought, and laughed out loud.
Grace looked up. Something in her expression reminded me of the years before she started kindergarten, tooling around in a black romper covered in red flowers, a look of knowing defiance that seemed incongruous on a face so young. A spark of fearlessness.
Her bright hazel eyes narrowed slightly, and she nodded.
“Yeah?” I asked.
“Let’s do this.”


CHAD: I’m just happy for you today. I’m sure it’s a weight lifted. If it’s not, it should be. Recognize it thusly.
MEGAN: It is. I have a hard time believing nice things people say anyway, so on this scale, it’s all just unbelievable.

Both in tone and in magnitude, the response to what Jeff and I had posted was nothing like I had expected. Messages of encouragement and well-wishing flooded my Twitter account, and I was floored by how rare were the people who chose to denounce Grace and me. To tell us that we could never be forgiven. People from across the country and all over the world offered my sister and me friendship, places to sleep, and invitations to church by the hundreds. Dozens of newspapers and blogs around the world picked up the story, and even Gawker—notorious for its lack of scruples—had kind things to say.

… good for them for escaping what is essentially a cult and defying its wrath by going public about it. As far as the deprogramming process goes, Megan says, “I don’t know what I believe,” but she claims that she wants to determine how she can be “an influence for good.” And she has the rest of her life to atone.
Happy coming out day, girls.

Particularly moving were the messages from those with whom I had sparred on Twitter over the years—people I had come to know and like, people who had seen me regularly sling around condescension, condemnation, and words like “fag” and “whore.” Chad Darnell was one such person, a gay man living in Los Angeles. Our exchanges had been full of Bible verses, friendly sarcasm, and sincerity—but as with all outsiders, I had been suspicious of his kindness and concern. His response to my post about leaving Westboro was an open letter, which read in part:

Dear Megan:
Hey, girl, hey.
When I woke up to messages from family and friends that you had left the church, I literally burst into tears. I sat in bed for 20 minutes reading your letter with ugly tears (like bad Oprah crying) streaming down my face and I couldn’t stop.
I am so proud of you.
I am so happy for you.
I (we) never felt hate in our hearts toward YOU. Sure, we didn’t like you that much, but the action of you physically removing yourself from that situation is a strength that most humans will never know. That was your family and your main source of interaction with people. We get it. Trust me, we ALL get it.
Megan, it would be the great honor of my church, my people to have you as a guest. We just want you to come and breathe and feel what a community trying to make the world a better place should be. We feel a special bond to you after all your tweeting over the years.
And know that we all, everyone at our church, forgive you. And we wish you support and kindness and love.
Love,
Chad (and everyone at Hollywood United Methodist Church)

With each new kindness, I understood with ever greater clarity the depths of my ignorance about the world. Clearly, the people writing these words were not the demons I had been warned about. They didn’t hate Grace and me, and they didn’t expect us to hate our family. They understood that the same people who taught us to curse Westboro’s enemies were the ones who had kissed our cheeks and tucked us in at night. Though we had shown these people hostility and contempt in their most vulnerable moments, they extended generosity and compassion to us in ours. They empathized with us in our pain and wanted good things for our future. Dustin and Laura, Newbery and C.G., Cora the bartender and Ryan the dealer—I had seen them as exceptions, but it was starting to occur to me that there might be a lot more goodness in the world than I had believed. I’d been so sure that it was filled with hateful, selfish, vindictive people, and I had never found so much hope in being proved wrong.
For their part, Westboro members responded exactly as I expected—which didn’t stop my heart from racing or my insides from twisting in anguish. It was everything they had said about ex-members before, but I couldn’t grasp that they were saying such things about me. How could they? Knowing everything that had happened, how could my parents? The church issued a statement with one assumption at its heart: that the church was blameless in the departure of any member, because there could be no legitimate reason to leave Westboro. I read the words of an elder in several newspapers with growing bitterness, the same self-serving position we had always assumed when church members departed. “She just decided that she didn’t want to obey God,” Steve said. “They wanted to serve themselves.” Years would pass and the lies would continue unabated. Steve seemed to have no compunction about publicly denying every fact that revealed the church as flawed, hypocritical. He denied the takeover by the elders, the petty backbiting among church members, the merciless shunning of my mother. He pretended their cruel treatment of her—removing my mother from the work she had done for decades as a way of shaming and isolating her—wasn’t punishment but kindness. “We lifted her burden,” he said. It was an especially embittering fabrication because it was exactly what they should have done—what I’d wished so often that they had done.
And then, amid the deluge of words, this paragraph:

Shirley Phelps-Roper, the mother of the sisters, is doing OK in the wake of her daughters leaving the church, Drain said. On Wednesday, she was at a local facility welcoming the birth that morning of a grandson, Jason Brent.

Jason Brent. Sam’s son. A nephew I might never know.
Sitting on the green couch by the inn’s living room window, I watched a whitetail deer cross Lincoln Avenue and disappear around the side of the house. My efforts at remaining calm were proving unsuccessful, and I sobbed tears of desperation—not because outsiders might believe Steve’s dissembling, but because church members would. Just as I had done with Nate and Josh and Libby, they would accept these narratives about Grace and me. We would be painted as evil, and they would be disposed to listen. I had tried to preempt this process back at home, to thwart it in as many ways as I could, even turning my final tweet as a Westboro member into a message to my sister Bekah. An angry person on Twitter had told her that “nobody loves you,” and she had retorted, “That’s not true! @MeganPhelps loves me.;)” My response remained there for months, and I had refused to post anything else afterward. It was a reference to a line from a movie we had watched together, delivered forcefully by Jack Nicholson—a standing reminder to her in my absence.

“You’re goddamn right I do!”—A Few Good Men

They had to do it, though. Demonizing Grace and me was the only way to protect their image of Westboro as not just benign but wholly good. They couldn’t allow themselves to truly contemplate the idea that Westboro might be wrong about the ideals to which they had dedicated their lives. They needed to believe in the righteousness of their cause just as much as we needed them to see its destructiveness.
What were they telling my siblings right now? That I had traded them in because I wanted the approval and love and attention of outsiders—that I wanted to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season, because I loved the world more. Had I chosen the love of the world over the love of my family? My mind rebelled at the thought, at the crippling guilt. I would never have willingly made such an exchange. This had never been a choice between strangers and family, between the world’s love and its hatred. It wasn’t the desire for an easy life that led me to leave. Losing them was the price of honesty. A shredded heart for a quiet conscience.

There was silence on the other end of the line for a beat.
“What?”
I sat down at the kitchen table at the inn, watching Luna stalk across the hardwood floor. She was one of the Floyds’ two black cats, a stray they’d taken in not long before Grace and I arrived. Animals made me anxious, because we’d never had pets in our home—“We had brothers and allergies, instead,” I always joked—but Luna was beautiful, her fur thick and lustrous, her eyes a piercing yellow. She suddenly turned and scampered up the stairs, spooked, and I switched my phone to the other ear. “Yeah,” I said. “You’ve definitely got part of the blame for my leaving.”
It had been a few days since Jeff and I had published our posts online, and I was catching up with another of my new friends and counselors. David Abitbol was an Orthodox Jew living in Jerusalem, and the two of us were discussing a question that had been on my mind frequently in the months since it had first occurred to me to leave the church: How had this happened? How had my perspective changed so much in such a short amount of time, from an obedient follower who instinctively suppressed doubts to a malcontent who just couldn’t leave well enough alone? I had spent endless hours racking my brain for clues, tracking the changes in my perspective over time, and I found myself returning again and again to Twitter and to my complicated friendship with David—the source of my first conscious disagreement with one of Westboro’s doctrines. I had reflexively suppressed it, but it had come rushing back the day that I first considered leaving Westboro, painting in that cold basement.
David and I had met on Twitter in 2009, almost immediately after I had brought Westboro’s message to the platform. He ran a popular Jewish blog called “Jewlicious” and was active on social media, so the Jewish Telegraphic Agency had listed him second in their ranking of the “100 Most Influential Jewish Twitterers.” He had become one of my first targets. Our initial exchanges were plagued by unbridled antagonism—I told David that Jewish customs were “dead, rote rituals,” while he maintained that my grandfather was a closet case—but it didn’t take long for him to tone it down, and for me to follow his lead.


DAVID (@Jewlicious): Ultimate frisbee in the park today against Christian team. Told an Israeli, “Dude, it’s okay to hit them, because they HAVE to turn the other cheek…”
MEGAN (@meganphelps): You give them too much credit! They don’t follow any other teachings of Jesus; what makes you think they’d follow that one? =)
DAVID: Aw c’mon, Megan! These were nice Christians! Just because they don’t go picketing all over the place with signs that say “God Hates Fags…”
MEGAN: I’m a tad skeptical of their niceness; after all, what’s nice about encouraging people on their way to Hell?
Plus, I’m a little suspicious of anyone who plays ultimate frisbee. =D
DAVID: You know, for an evil something something, you sure do crack me up …


When David started asking me questions about our picket signs, it gave me a kind of permission to ask him questions about Jewish theology. In those days, the only thing I knew about Jews for sure was that they had killed Jesus and were thus cursed by God.… Jews: Who both killed the Lord Jesus, and their own prophets, and have persecuted us; and they please not God, and are contrary to all men. But I didn’t know what Jews actually believed. I wanted to understand so that I would be better prepared to argue against those beliefs, to show them from the Bible that Jewish ideas were wrong. I tried to read books to help me—including The Complete Idiot’s Guide to Understanding Judaism—but I found greater clarity in speaking with a flesh-and-blood person. Thanks to Twitter, the distance between Kansas and Israel was no obstacle.
At first, I had used passages from the New Testament to argue against David’s doctrinal positions. When he said he didn’t believe in the divinity of New Testament books, I started limiting my references to the Old Testament. “That’s not actually what those verses say,” he would tell me. “Your translation is off. You would know that if you spoke Hebrew!” In response, I bought all three levels of coursework from Rosetta Stone and signed up for webinars on biblical Hebrew so that I could learn the language. David started sending me tips, teaching me new words, and saying laila tov—good night—when he signed off. The dynamic between us was strange—never charged in the way that my friendship with Chad would be later, but still conflicting. David was an enemy of Christ. There was no confusion about the fact that we were at odds with each other, and I was certain that his understanding of the Bible was wrong—but as with C.G. and so many others on Twitter, I found myself liking him anyway.
My conversations with David had continued for more than a year, during which time I twice protested events at which he was speaking—first at the Jewlicious Festival in California, and then at a conference in Louisiana. David came out to talk with me both times, and though I continued to warn him that he was on the path to Hell, our banter had an ease to it that was unusual on the picket line. In New Orleans, we even exchanged gifts. He brought me a Middle Eastern dessert from the market near his home in Jerusalem, and I brought him some of my favorite peppermint chocolate. He flipped the bar over and started teaching me about the kosher symbols on the packaging, while I listened earnestly and held a GOD HATES JEWS sign.
The temporary end of my communication with David came shortly after the picket in New Orleans, following a debate about Westboro’s DEATH PENALTY FOR FAGS sign. He had pointed out that our sign contradicted Jesus’s own instruction about the death penalty—He that is without sin among you, let him first cast a stone at her—but he had also connected it to an issue that was far more personal. “Didn’t your mom have your oldest brother out of wedlock?” David had asked me. “That’s another sin that deserves the death penalty, isn’t it?” Until that moment, I had never thought through that fact that if my mother had been killed for her sin, she wouldn’t have had the opportunity to repent and be forgiven.
That without mercy, my beloved family would not exist.
Pacing around the inn’s dining room table, I finished explaining to David why I had suddenly stopped speaking to him two years earlier.
“I was terrified. The points you made about the DEATH PENALTY FOR FAGS sign—that was the first time I consciously rejected one of the church’s doctrines. It was the first time I believed that I could be right about something, and that the rest of the church could be wrong. It gave me some little bit of confidence in my own thoughts, and helped me not to just blindly trust the elders. It might seem like such a small point, but it was huge for me—a loose thread of contradiction in our tightly woven arguments. I doubt I would have ever had the confidence to challenge other Westboro doctrines without that.”
I suddenly remembered that even my cousin Jael had realized the significant role that David had played in my departure from Westboro. I read him the text message she had sent me the day after I left, specifically alluding to both David (“Jewlicious”) and C.G. (“FKA”).

I think over some years you turned aside to try to persuade Satan through clever argument on Twitter, etc. Speaking to Jewlicious, FKA, & others—you let Satan nibble on your ear and flatter your vanity—during long and continual conversations. Whether that was with one or many Satan-inspired minions, it has caused you to dig for doctrinal fallacy—when you know better.

I had rejected my cousin’s accusations the instant I read them. Being influenced by outsiders was a moral failing, and I couldn’t bring myself to acknowledge that I had allowed it to happen—and on Twitter, no less. But as I considered Jael’s assertions, I stopped seeing my change of mind as a sign of weakness or vulnerability. At the root of my shame was the assumption that I had nothing to learn from people like David and C.G.—a premise that had so clearly proved false. Bit by bit, my shame was being replaced by profound gratitude to Twitter for its commitment to being “the free speech wing of the free speech party.” Instead of booting me from the platform for “hate speech,” as many had demanded, it had put me in conversation with people and ideas that effectively challenged beliefs that had been hammered into me since I was a child—and that conversation had been far more illuminating than decades’ worth of rage, isolation, and efforts to shame and silence. It struck me as ironic that this very idea had been repeatedly referenced by church members when they spoke of the First Amendment, a quote from 1920s-era Supreme Court Justice Louis Brandeis: “If there be time to expose through discussion the falsehood and fallacies, to avert the evil by the processes of education, the remedy to be applied is more speech, not enforced silence.”
“Listen,” David said, after listening to all this, “you have to come to Jewlicious next month. You should meet some of the people you protested here three years ago. You can come and see what Judaism is really about.”
I chose my words carefully. “Uh, I don’t … think that’s a good idea.” In fact, it specifically went against the plan that Grace and I had concocted, to wit, disappear into the ether forever.
“I’m sure it’s a good idea,” David countered. “And listen, I know you’re afraid to talk about this stuff. I know the wounds are still fresh and that we were ‘the enemy’ and all of that … but I think this will help you, and I know it will help others. It could bring a lot of healing to a lot of people. If you can bring yourself to do it, you absolutely should.”
I told him I didn’t think I could do it.
“If it would make you feel better, we’ll do it on Saturday. It’ll be Shabbat, so there won’t be any recording—no photos or videos. Just a conversation. Just you and us.”
Everything inside me screamed no. Enemy territory. Betraying my family. Making myself vulnerable to people I had hurt, and who had hurt me. Who had every reason to hate me. How could I possibly?
I closed my eyes and the line went silent again.
“Megan?” David asked.
“Let me talk to Grace.”

Three weeks later, my sister and I found ourselves in Los Angeles at the Museum of Tolerance, a modern, multilevel complex whose purpose was to encourage visitors to challenge their prejudices and assumptions. I couldn’t help feeling a bit wounded by David’s suggestion that we visit—wasn’t I already doing so much to challenge my prejudices?—but I recognized in my resistance more of Westboro’s teachings: our derision of the whole concept of “tolerance.” Ideas that contradicted our own were inherently morally bankrupt. Why, in the name of God, should we tolerate them?
Standing just outside the entrance to the first exhibit with David and Grace, I listened as the docent expounded on the museum and its history. She was a stately woman, midsixties, I guessed, with silver hair cropped short. The purpose of this museum wasn’t just to tell the stories of human rights atrocities, she explained, but to remind us to act when we saw things going awry. To encourage us to be more than passive bystanders. I had a sinking feeling listening to her descriptions of the exhibits. There was going to be something about Westboro in here.
Sure enough, immediately after passing through the entrance, I spotted a photo on the wall. “Hey, look,” I said to David. “There’s Bekah and Gran.” It was a photo of my sister and grandmother protesting during the trial of one of Matthew Shepard’s killers. Bekah had always been tiny as a girl, and in the photo she looked much younger than her twelve years.
David laughed and mocked me. “‘There’s Gran!’ Well, this is why we’re here…” The three of us spoke for a few minutes about the impact that Westboro had had on the world, the number of people who had been jarred by our message. Their message, I reminded myself. I had to stop saying we and our and us.
As the three of us spoke, another docent led a group of young people in matching hunter-green sweat suits over to the photo of Bekah and Gran, a security guard trailing behind them. The guide told the story of Matthew Shepard, a gay college student who was brutally murdered by two young men he met at a small-town bar, and the protests and counterprotests at his funeral. We listened from a few paces back, and then David said quietly, “That’s their grandmother.”
I felt panicky.
“Excuse me?” the woman said.
“They grew up in that church that protests gays. They left a few months ago.”
Fifteen confused faces stared over at Grace and me. “You hated gay people?” one girl asked.
“I didn’t hate them…” I trailed off. “I thought that God hated them. I thought that the Bible said so. I thought it was my duty to God to tell people that.”
The questions came one after another—about Westboro’s doctrines and beliefs, about what it had been like growing up there, about our family, and then finally about why we had left. What had made us change.
I pointed at David. “He helped.”
David held up his hands as if in self-defense. “I was just trying to get her to see how misguided her ideas were—how hurtful she was being to other people.”
When the kids finally fell silent, the docent stood wide-eyed for a moment, and then thanked us for sharing our experiences. “I’m sure it must have been so painful to leave your family, but this is an example for us, too. We all need to stand up. Our families might not be like yours, but when we see people being hateful or bullying others, we need to speak up.”
Back in the lobby at the end of our tour, David and Grace and I stood reflecting as groups of young students milled about.
“See?” he said. “That wasn’t so bad, was it?”
“It made me anxious,” I said. “And ashamed. It’s so hard to frame the words to admit that what I so passionately believed for so long was wrong and destructive in many ways. And I can’t help but feel like I’m betraying my family every time I open my mouth about any of it … But it could have been a lot worse. They were very kind.”
I had a brief moment of hope, thinking that maybe the Jewlicious Festival that weekend might be a similar experience—but then I flashed back to the furor that had taken place three years earlier. Each one of us picketers had been separated and surrounded by angry mobs. Counterprotesters had dressed up as Jesus and the Easter bunny, screaming and chanting and hitting us with their signs while Long Beach police officers looked on and laughed. Two old women sporting sunglasses and sneers had found their way through the boisterous crowd and planted themselves directly behind me, each whispering lurid descriptions of sex into my ears—not as Gramps had done from the pulpit, referencing gays, but with me at the center of their sick fantasies. I was repulsed, wanted to bolt, but I couldn’t move because of the throng. I strained to lift my signs up above the melee and sang at the top of my lungs just to keep the words of the old women out of my ears.
The festival, I feared, would be a different experience entirely.

The ninth annual Jewlicious Festival was to take place in Long Beach, California, aboard the RMS Queen Mary, an ocean liner from the 1930s now retired and permanently docked in Queensway Bay. It was billed as a gathering of fifteen hundred Jewish students and young adults, who would come together for a three-day celebration of Jewish culture. I spent the first two days roaming from one conversation to the next with an endless stream of questions about Jewish history, food, music, and theology, but soon ran headlong into the original catalyst for the trip.
After lunch on Saturday, David led Grace and me into a grand banquet room for our public discussion. It had been relatively easy to endure the rejection of outsiders while I was at Westboro, surrounded by people who took the heat right alongside me—and who likewise believed that we were speaking God’s words, not our own. For I have not spoken of myself; but the Father which sent me, he gave me a commandment, what I should say, and what I should speak. But this—standing on my own two feet, accountable for my own thoughts and ideas, which were still in constant flux—this was panic-inducing. David took in my blank stare and shallow breath. “I’ll be right there with you,” he reassured me. “It’ll be okay.”
We took our seats at a cloth-covered table at the front of the room, which had been filled to capacity with rows of chairs lined up like a firing squad. Once those were taken, more people filled in the space at the edges of the room, crowding at the back before the doors were finally closed. The group was about 150 strong, crammed in close, waiting.
“Well!” David called out. “Welcome! Can you all hear me okay?” No amplification equipment on Shabbat, either. There were murmurs from the back. All good.
The room was impeccably silent as David directed the conversation. He returned to the earliest days of our relationship as frenemies on Twitter, offered probing questions about Westboro and its doctrines—especially as they related to Jewish people—and, finally, asked me to explain why we had left. I stared assiduously down at the white tablecloth as I spoke, at the beads of condensation dripping down the sides of my glass of ice water, at David’s face as he tried to gently coax the conversation forward. I did not dare to look across the table, which felt to me like a shield. The first row of chairs sat just on the other side of it, the closest faces only a few feet away.
Grace said little until David asked about leaving our family. I tried to be vague so as to avoid openly weeping, but she spoke up suddenly and passionately, until it felt like we were both drowning in it again.
“We’ll answer some questions in a minute,” David said, as Grace and I collected ourselves, “but the last thing I wanted to share is a revelation I had this week during my conversations with Megan and Grace. To be honest: I don’t know if I could do what they did. If I had been raised the way that they were raised, I would’ve been out there holding signs with Grandpa Phelps, too. If I was brought up in their family, would I have the strength of character and the moral fortitude to leave my family? To leave everything I’ve ever known?” He shook his head. “I want to say that I would have, but I don’t know.”
When I finally looked across the table, my eye was drawn instantly to a woman a few rows back. I recognized her as one of the counterprotesters from three years earlier. Long dark hair. Sharp brown eyes. She had been part of the group that had surrounded me, grabbing for my signs, pushing and pressing in on me. It had been her face, twisted in disgust, that had been screaming into mine while those two old women whispered in my ears. I felt my skin crawl, my stomach clenching as fear and betrayal surfaced again. Some of these people had attacked my family. What was I doing here?
But the woman’s face wasn’t vengeful now. It was splotchy with tears. As David began to call on audience members with questions, I was moved to find similar expressions on faces all over the room. Not angry. Mournful. They framed their questions with kindness. They offered forgiveness. Again and again, they expressed the hope that if we could change, then others could, too. Many would find Grace and me later, embrace after embrace, and tell us their stories of Westboro. Students with LGBT friends driven to self-harm by an atmosphere of intolerance we had fed. A twenty-something whose parents had forced him from his home when he’d come out as gay—“I know what it feels like to lose your family,” he said as he wrapped me in a bear hug. “You’re not alone.” A U.S. Marine who had witnessed Westboro’s presence at the funeral of his friend. It had been over a year, he told me, and still he had so much rage. He couldn’t turn on a dime and let it all go, but it helped him to understand. He believed he could find peace now.
Most shocking of all would be the handful of apologies. Some had accosted me on Twitter, others outside the festival three years earlier. “I didn’t know,” they said. “I was angry. Next time, I’ll try to find a better way.”
“Just a few more questions, guys,” David said. “They’re gonna need this room for the next session soon.”
“What’s the most important thing you’ve learned since you’ve been here?” one girl asked. “And what do you hope will happen to the church?”
I had spent the week parsing Bible verses with David and Rabbi Yonah Bookstein, who ran the festival with his wife, Rachel, and I couldn’t help diving into the verse I had most fixated on. “One of the most mind-blowing things is how they understand the verse that says, ‘Love thy neighbor.’” I quoted the verses. Thou shalt not hate thy brother in thine heart: thou shalt in any wise rebuke thy neighbour, and not suffer sin upon him. Thou shalt not avenge, nor bear any grudge against the children of thy people, but thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.
“At home,” I continued, “we always equated love with rebuke, because of that passage. As long as we believed our words to be truthful, we were free to rebuke the rest of the world at any time, in any place, and in any way that we wanted. We could be harsh, and crude, and insulting, and it didn’t matter, because everyone else was Hell-bound anyway. Those verses justified almost everything we did—including picketing funerals. But David told us about that passage from a Jewish perspective.”
“From our view,” David said, “a rebuke is supposed to happen privately, kindly, and with people you have reason to believe will hear you. If you’re attacking someone you know won’t listen—if you’re trying to correct them harshly, in a way that will provoke them to anger instead of encouraging them to change their ways—then you’re the one who is committing a sin.”
“I feel so stupid saying this,” I said, “but we really believed that it was irrelevant how we spoke to people. ‘Gospel preaching is not hateful!’ we always said. ‘Truth equals love!’ But now it seems so painfully obvious: of course it matters how we talk to people. Truth and love are not synonyms. The New Testament even says it plainly. Speak the truth in love. The Apostle Paul said, To the weak became I as weak and that we should weep with them that weep. I don’t know how we missed that for so long.”
“Your other question about what we hope will happen to the church…” Grace paused. “We want them all to leave. People have been speculating for a long time about what would happen if Gramps dies–”
“You mean when Gramps dies?” David asked.
“He doesn’t believe he’s going to die,” Grace said. “He thinks Jesus will return while he’s still alive. People think the church will fall apart if Gramps dies … but if the church ever did fall apart and our family still believed the church’s doctrines—that would be awful. We’re not sure how the church could come to an end without destroying the lives of everyone inside.”
“We’re still hopeful, though,” I said. “We think our best chance is that someone will be able to get through to the people in the church. What we really hope is that we can find a way to do for our family what David helped do for me.”

Two days later, having been unofficially adopted by both David and the Bookstein family, I returned to Deadwood alone. I loved the new members of our southern California family, but part of me was wounded that Grace had chosen to stay in Los Angeles with Rabbi Yonah and Rachel and the kids. I remembered that Libby had felt the same way when I’d chosen to stay in Deadwood. “I feel like you’re choosing strangers over family,” she had accused me during a phone call, her voice breaking. Don’t you understand? I’d thought. It’s not a decision meant to hurt you. I just can’t be there. When it came to Grace, I wouldn’t keep repeating the pattern we’d learned at Westboro—the tendency to moralize every decision as good or evil, the wielding of guilt and the withholding of affection to control the people I loved. Sometimes, a person just needed to do what was right for them.
I tried to focus on the good that might come of my sister’s absence. Maybe it would lift some of the pressure off our relationship. Maybe we needed a little space to grow on our own, rather than trying to live as a unit. Because we shared a bank account and the car I’d bought a few years earlier, our sisterhood sometimes felt more like a marriage, and the confusion was a source of strife between us. Sometimes it seemed that Grace wanted me to be a big sister, sometimes a substitute parent. She resented needing me for anything and was desperate for independence, but she relied on me for practical skills she hadn’t yet developed. My need to take care of and protect her was so strong that I was having a hard time distinguishing between us, always speaking in terms of “we” and “us” and “ours.” Sometimes it felt like we were the same person.
“No,” Laura said emphatically when I told her this, “the two of you are so different.” I was bewildered by this declaration, honestly believing the exact reverse. “I think this will be good for both of you.”
And it was. Even though I felt awkward and anxious without Grace by my side, even though I would never have chosen to be apart from her, I realized that it was nice to have some space to myself. I started spending time with my coworkers at TDG—long conversations about politics and human nature with Jack, fierce games of volleyball with Brittany and Amanda and the boys. I was heartened when a man claiming to be a member of Anonymous called the office to threaten me, and one of my coworkers responded by lambasting him, standing up for me and telling the man that I was a good person. I also became closer with Dustin and Laura, who would remain two of my closest friends long after I left Deadwood, long after they left the Jehovah’s Witnesses and joined me in the wandering path of doubt and skepticism and confusion and wonder and awe at how different the world was than we had believed. When we compared stories of our unraveling faith, I was struck by the similarities. In the same way I had been perplexed by the arbitrariness of the different modesty standards among Westboro families—How could the standards of God differ from house to house?—Dustin had been confounded by the Witness prohibition on movies with an “R” rating. In the United States, that meant The Matrix was forbidden—but when he saw the film on the shelf of a Witness in the U.K., an elder explained that the rating system in that country was different. For both Dustin and me, one of the earliest sources of doubt had been incredibly trivial matters that highlighted internal inconsistency and a deeper issue—a dawning awareness of human perception coloring and altering apparently divine laws. In the stories of others departing similar high-control groups, I would notice this pattern again and again: an “unshakable faith” first called into question by the group’s failure to live up to its own standards.
And then I finally—finally—met Chad.
He had declared he’d come to the play and then failed to show, and I had nearly decided that he was a lost cause. That he didn’t really want to meet me. That it was all just some sort of imaginary friendship for him. That this whole thing really was an episode of Catfish. Three times in as many months he had told me he’d be in Deadwood and would see me, and three times he had failed to appear. I’d spent those months making excuses for his behavior, rationalizing and justifying his neglect: “What respectable person would want anything to do with someone with a past like mine? Whatever the reason, a girl who’d tormented grieving families at funerals and liberally tossed around epithets like ‘fag’ isn’t the one to bring home to Mom.”
Still, I was wholly unable to grasp why he refused to just tell me that. I must have seemed insane to him, expressing my undying love in one breath and begging him to please just let me off the hook in the next, to just admit that this wasn’t going anywhere so that I could move on with my miserable life. I was in the throes of obsession and despair that I suppose is typical of an unrequited first love, so I certainly wasn’t going to act the part of the sane, rational, self-respecting one. After the third misfire, though, I could not ignore what was painfully, devastatingly apparent: his dereliction was no accident.


MEGAN: Chad? Tell me sometime. I can be patient. I just don’t want to chase something that doesn’t want to be caught. I’m almost convinced that’s what I’m doing.


To my great amazement and relief, he finally materialized the weekend after the Jewlicious Festival. I had been cut off from my family for more than four months by then, and had been slammed repeatedly into the outermost threshold of my capacity for heartbreak and rejection. Just at the point when I thought I would lose my mind from hurt, shame, and rage—at myself, mostly, for having believed his sweet words when I knew in the smallest parts of myself that I didn’t deserve to have someone care about me like that, that I didn’t deserve any good thing in this life—Chad texted from a casino in town and said that I should come meet him there.
It was 10:30 P.M., and I was livid. In the back of my mind was a niggling worry about what he’d think of me, whether he’d be disappointed, but I had no mental energy to process it. Instead, my circuits were overloaded with humiliation and anger: we had obviously arrived at the portion of the program where the catfisher pretends to finally follow through with a meeting and then stands up his foolish victim for the last time. I was incensed at the thought, and I absolutely was not going to take another moment of this sham if it turned out to be another evasion. I had every intention of following through with the threat I issued in response to Chad’s invitation.


MEGAN: If I leave my comfy bed and come there and don’t see you, I’m so never talking to either one of us again!


I changed out of my pajamas and made my way through the crowds dressed for St. Patrick’s Day—it was March 16, the night Deadwood was having its holiday pub crawl. The casino was packed with people alive with alcohol, roaring with laughter in outlandish green costumes, and I had no idea how to find him. He must have been watching the door, because after a few moments, he stood up at one of the blackjack tables with a sheepish look, almost apologetic. I recognized him instantly from across the room—too tall, too blond, and too like his photo to be anyone else—and my anger evaporated. I slipped through the throng, following him to a less populated corner of the room where we sat down at adjacent slot machines and began to talk.
The chaos surrounding us dissolved as I watched him in the garish lights of the casino floor. I couldn’t take in anything but him. Some remote corner of my mind noted that his gray pullover and lean, muscular frame made him look like a college frat boy, but it was his face that held my gaze: the blue eyes, the half smile, the blond curls that fell over his forehead. I noticed these things, but most of my attention was spent in a struggle to assimilate the reality of his existence. That he was, in fact, corporeal. He didn’t say it, but I surmised that he was still afraid of me—of our age difference, afraid I’d meet him just this once and then bail, afraid that I would reject him. Preposterous. For two hours we tried to feel each other out, both of us quiet and cautious, laughing and talking about everything except what we really wanted to. Just like our days of Words With Friends chats, our conversation was entirely chaste, decorous—“appropriate,” as my family would say. I did manage to ask for a hug at one point. It was clear from his body language that he thought this a strange request—he kept glancing anxiously over his shoulder to the table where his friends were still playing blackjack—but he got up to oblige me. He stood nearly a foot taller than me and he didn’t bend down, so my face was pressed awkwardly into his chest. I didn’t mind. I inhaled slowly and closed my eyes.
It wasn’t the embrace I’d dreamed about back in Topeka so many hopeless months before—the city was wrong, and the season, his hands weren’t in my hair and it was midnight instead of noontime—but it was a damn good start. I said a simple goodbye, left him to his cards, and headed back out into the night.

The rest of the year felt like sprinting in slow motion, urgent and constant movement that made the hours pass like deep breaths. The odometer hadn’t quite reached five thousand miles the day my Pontiac pulled out of its spot on the Phelps-Roper driveway for the last time, and by the time November 11 rolled around again, more than forty thousand miles of cornfields, mountains, Midwestern thunderstorms, and Canadian countryside had raced past my windows. Grace rejoined me in Deadwood after five weeks in Los Angeles, only to leave again a few weeks later, our orbits converging and diverging as we tried to understand who we were and what it might mean to live a good life outside of Westboro’s paradigm. Every tenuous connection we’d made to the world while at the church suddenly became a lifeline, pulling us along from place to place, and into communities of people we’d learned to despise—from Bible studies with Christians in icy Des Moines, to Yiddish classes and volunteer work at the Jewish Federation in Montreal; from walking a former Westboro member down the aisle at her wedding in Connecticut, to supporting my former Twitter enemy Chad Darnell at the screening of his new film at the Kansas City LGBT Film Festival.
Month after month, my sister and I continued to drift around the country, never spending more than a few days or a few weeks at a time in any one place. We supported ourselves on the money we’d saved at Westboro, with Grace’s excess scholarship funds from her university, with an insurance settlement for damage done to my car by a wicked hailstorm in the Black Hills, and with part-time jobs we found—Grace working as an assistant at a daycare center, while I worked remotely for TDG and did freelance administrative work I found online. But more than anything, the sustaining force behind this period of wandering was our family and friends, friends of friends, even friends of friends of friends, people who opened their homes to us and helped us learn to see the world from many perspectives.
In the midst of my travels and several weeks after our St. Patrick’s Day adventure in Deadwood, Chad called to ask me out on my first date ever. We met for dinner in Omaha the following week, and caught an opening-weekend showing of—what else?—The Great Gatsby. It was a cool evening and everything was foreign to me, each sensation making it difficult for me to find my breath: the warmth of his big hand as it enveloped mine; the drumbeat of my pulse when he wrapped his arm around my waist; the way my whole body seemed to melt at being kissed for the first time. I knew I never wanted to say goodbye, but we did, and I cried after he left. He went home to South Dakota, and I returned to California to visit the Booksteins.
Two weeks later, I drove twenty-two hours straight from Los Angeles to Deadwood to see him. He made the six-hour drive to meet me that weekend, and we met up nearly every weekend of my first summer away from home. We explored the wild of the Black Hills all season long, my elation tempered only by the knowledge that my parents would be dismayed by the path I had chosen. Instead of becoming habituated to Chad’s visits, I found each one more improbable than the last. As I came to know him, it became clear that just about every part of his existence made our relationship so unlikely that it should have been impossible. He had painstakingly built for himself a successful life and career, arranging it all to be as simple and quiet and predictable as possible. Understanding how intensely he valued privacy, the lengths to which he went to eschew attention, how little of himself he tended to reveal to others, I couldn’t help but marvel that he had ever shared anything with me while I was still at Westboro. He marveled, too, with that particular smile he’d get—awe mixed with disbelief—when he couldn’t seem to grasp the reality of us. “Why are you here?” he’d balk, searching my face as if an answer might be discovered in the blue of an iris or the curve of a cheekbone. “How?”
That question became my obsession, too, and the further I ventured from the constraints of Westboro’s belief system, the more I found myself looking back across what seemed to be an ever-widening gulf, wondering how others might be able to traverse it. I remembered how much sense the church’s beliefs had made to me while I was a member, and became fixated on trying to pinpoint exactly where Westboro’s error lay—and most important, how to communicate my changing perspective to my family in a way that they could hear, and wouldn’t just dismiss out of hand. I read through their tweets and sermons compulsively, challenging myself to articulate both sides of the argument: why Westboro held each of their positions, and why I no longer did. In some cases, the distance between us felt too vast to even make an attempt at persuasion—rushing directly into casting doubt on a literal interpretation of the Bible, for instance, would certainly go nowhere. Instead, I let my arguments be guided by the pattern that had worked with me, with Dustin and Laura, and with others whose stories I was coming to learn: the discovery of internal inconsistency and hypocrisy as an important first step in seeing outside of group dogma.
Though my arguments largely went unanswered, I made them to Westboro members via interviews, on Twitter, and through private messages. Coming up against their wall of certainty was often a frustrating and painful exercise, and not just because of the callousness and condescension that so often filled their rhetoric. At Westboro, any admission that we might be wrong about any doctrine was accompanied by intense shame and fear. If we reversed course on any issue, we did so quietly, never admitting publicly to our mistakes. From our point of view, acknowledging error and ignorance was anathema, because doing so would cast doubt on our message. While I engaged church members as an outsider, I started to understand that doubt was the point—that it was the most basic shift in how I experienced the world. Doubt was nothing more than epistemological humility: a deep and practical awareness that outside our sphere of knowledge there existed information and experiences that might show our position to be in error. Doubt causes us to hold a strong position a bit more loosely, such that an acknowledgment of ignorance or error doesn’t crush our sense of self or leave us totally unmoored if our position proves untenable. Certainty is the opposite: it hampers inquiry and hinders growth. It teaches us to ignore evidence that contradicts our ideas, and encourages us to defend our position at all costs, even as it reveals itself as indefensible. Certainty sees compromise as weak, hypocritical, evil, suppressing empathy and allowing us to justify inflicting horrible pain on others.
Doubt wasn’t the sin, I came to believe. It was the arrogance of certainty that poisoned Westboro at its foundations.
Whenever friends and family expressed concern about my continued focus on the church and the past, I would gently dismiss them—but inwardly, I began to wonder if my identity would be forever tied to Westboro. Would I ever be truly free of it? Should I be doing more to try to extract myself from anything related to them?
For several reasons, I ultimately answered these questions with an emphatic no. First, when I stopped to consider the idea, I realized that I didn’t want to be free of them—and that it didn’t seem possible anyway, not without rewriting or erasing most of my history. Attempting to do so would have been inauthentic, the denial of a truth that David had been quick to recognize and point out: that the church had made me who I was, including many of the best parts of me. “You left out of principle,” David had told Grace and me, “pretty much the same principles you were raised with. And your departure was both a rejection and an affirmation of everything you were taught. You are your parents’ children.” Weeping, I had asked him how he could possibly say such a thing. We were betrayers. “In a way,” he said, “leaving Westboro Baptist Church was the most Westboro Baptist Church thing you could have done. They’re the ones who taught you to stand up for what you believe in, no matter what it cost you. They taught you that. They just never imagined you’d be standing up to them.”
I also fundamentally disagreed with the characterization that I was “focused on the past.” Though I occasionally found myself litigating old grievances, my examinations of the past felt urgent precisely because this was a present and future issue. My family remained stuck in a pattern of thinking and behavior that inflicted unnecessary harm on themselves and on the communities they continued to target every single day. As someone who had contributed to that harm for so long, I felt an obligation to those communities to work to dismantle it from the outside. As the longtime recipient of so much love, attention, and care from my family, for me to simply abandon them seemed like the height of ingratitude, a failure to reflect the kind of person my parents raised me to be: strong in the face of difficulties, willing to do hard things and make sacrifices for those I love. And as someone who had learned to see Westboro’s ideology from both sides of the divide, I couldn’t help feeling that it would be an abdication of responsibility and the waste of a gift to turn my back on a problem into which I may have some useful insight. I didn’t want to become the embodiment of the example from the book of James: For if any be a hearer of the word, and not a doer, he is like unto a man beholding his natural face in a glass: For he beholdeth himself, and goeth his way, and straightway forgetteth what manner of man he was. To have been transformed by the gentle, persistent entreaties of strangers—and then to walk away and forget that example, to refuse to extend that same courtesy and grace to others? Brutish.
But perhaps the most important reason I couldn’t just leave it all behind was the lesson that began to crystallize in my mind from my very first night in Deadwood, talking with Cora at the bar inside the Four Aces Casino:
Westboro is not unique.
The church’s garish signs lend themselves to this view of its members as crazed doomsayers, cartoonish villains who celebrate the calamities of others with fiendish glee. But the truth is that the church’s radical, recalcitrant position is the result of very common, very human forces—everything from fear, family, guilt, and shame, to cognitive dissonance and confirmation bias. These are forces whose power affects us all, consciously and subconsciously, to one degree or another at every stage of our lives. And when these forces are coupled with group dynamics and a belief system that caters to so many of our most basic needs as human beings—a sense of meaning, of identity, of purpose, of reward, of goodness, of community—they provide group members with an astonishing level of motivation to cohere and conform, no matter the cost.
Others with stories like mine have shown me repeatedly that the root of Westboro’s ideology—the idea that our beliefs were “the one true way”—is not by any means limited to Westboro members. In truth, that idea is common, widespread, and on display everywhere humans gather, from religious circles to political ones. It gives a comforting sense of certainty, freeing the believer from existential angst and providing a sense of stability—a foundation on which to build a life. But the costs of that certainty can be enormous and difficult to identify. Ultimately, the same quality that makes Westboro so easy to dismiss—its extremism—is also what helps highlight the destructive nature of viewing the world in black and white, the danger of becoming calcified in a position and impervious to change.
Though their ideologies manifested in vastly different ways, it was fundamentalist religious groups, from Jehovah’s Witnesses to members of the Islamic State, that first permitted me to recognize the patterns of my upbringing. But as I watch the human tribal instinct play out in the era of Donald Trump, the echoes of Westboro are undeniable: the division of the world into Us and Them; the vilification of compromise; the knee-jerk expulsion of insiders who violate group orthodoxy; and the demonization of outsiders and the inability to substantively engage with their ideas, because we simply cannot step outside of our own. In this environment, there is a growing insistence that opposing views must be silenced, whether by the powers of government, the self-regulation of social media companies, or the self-censorship of individuals. At the heart of this insistence lie several false assumptions, including a sentiment that Westboro members would readily recognize: We have nothing to learn from these people. This sentiment was troubling to witness even among our tiny fringe movement, and I was relieved to abandon it when I left the church—but watching it spread among a vast and growing populace has been altogether more alarming, filling me with a growing sense of unease.
Another assumption gaining particular traction is that refusing to grant mainstream platforms to hated ideas will halt their spread. While the desire to shield people from these ideas is well-intentioned and completely understandable, I can’t help but see it as a fundamentally flawed strategy, one that ignores the practicalities of human nature. The fact is that people come to embrace these ideas in a multitude of ways: some argue themselves into destructive beliefs; others come to them as I did, taught by parents and loved ones; still others find them in books, films, and the annals of history. Especially in the age of the Internet, it seems clear that we cannot reasonably expect to permanently halt the spread of an idea, whether good or bad. What we can do, however, is foster a culture in which we have the language to articulate and defend sound arguments as to why certain ideas are harmful, the precise ways in which they’re flawed, and the suffering they have caused in the past.
Although private companies like Twitter and Facebook are clearly free to set the terms of use for their platforms, the principles enshrined in the First Amendment are no less relevant to social media than they are in public spaces: that open discourse and dialectic is the most effective enabler of the evolution of individuals and societies. That the answer to bad ideas is to publicly reason against them, to advocate for and propagate better ones. And that it is dangerous to vest any central authority with broad powers to limit the bounds of acceptable discussion—because these powers lend themselves to authoritarian abuse, the creation of echo chambers, and the marginalization of ideas that are true but unpopular. In short, the principles underlying the freedom of speech recognize that all of us are susceptible to cognitive deficiencies and groupthink, and that an open marketplace of ideas is our best defense against them. And though my life’s trajectory has led me to strongly believe in these principles, I continue to actively seek out, examine, and seriously consider the arguments of those who oppose them. To my mind, this is the essence of epistemological humility—not a lack of belief or principle or faith, not the refusal to take a position or the abdication of responsibility to stand against injustice, but a constant examination of one’s worldview, a commitment to honestly grappling with criticisms of it.
Along with so many others, I now watch the increasing hostility and hysteria of our modern political discourse and wonder how we, as a society, might change course. I consider the impending arrival of the baby girl I will shortly bring into the world with Chad—now, impossibly, my husband—and wonder how we’ll teach her to avoid falling into these destructive patterns in her own life. And though my experiences at Westboro would have been sufficient on their own to fix these questions in my mind, nothing has made me pursue them with greater urgency than witnessing the devastating end of my beloved Gramps.

One year after my appearance at the Jewlicious Festival, I was back with David in Los Angeles for another. My phone rang, and the voice on the other end of the line was my brother Zach, recently departed from Westboro. The tears running down my face were a mixture of happiness at having my brother back, and grief at the thought of my parents and siblings facing yet another void in the Phelps-Roper family. Another empty room in the home we’d shared for so long. I asked my brother the eternal question—Why?—and listened as he described a disillusionment that was achingly familiar to me.
But I had another question.
“Zach, what’s going on with Gramps? I’ve been checking the church website for months, and he hasn’t been giving any sermons. Is he okay?”
My brother’s voice dropped almost to a whisper. “Well … he … uh…” Zach stammered. “He’s in hospice.”
My heart stopped. My grandfather had believed that he was never going to die. That Jesus would return and bring him to Glory before that could ever happen. He’d said it so often that it seemed a foregone conclusion even then, even though I scarcely believed in God anymore.
“… and he was voted out of the church.”
Neither of us said anything for a few minutes as I sobbed at the image of my grandfather sick and dying and alone in a hospice bed. At the unparalleled cruelty of my family, which had somehow grown even worse since my departure, consuming even Gramps himself. But if ye bite and devour one another, take heed that ye be not consumed one of another. I had been pacing the sidewalk in front of the Booksteins’ home, walking across the elaborate chalk paintings that Grace and I had done with their children. The same sorts of drawings we’d done with my siblings, cousins, nieces, and nephew back in Topeka. I sank to the ground, pants covered in chalk, face covered with tears, ignoring the stares from groups of twelve-year-old Jewish girls walking by in their long skirts and opaque tights. And again, I put the question to my brother. Why?
I disconnected the call a few minutes later and returned to the Booksteins’ Shabbat table, sitting across from David.
“What’s wrong?” he asked immediately. I shook my head, unable to speak.
“Would it make you happy if something bad happened to my Gramps?” I finally managed to choke out. I hoped the answer was no. I thought it would be. I knew that my Gramps had taught us to celebrate the tragedies of our enemies—that many would see this outcome as his just comeuppance—but that very idea was one of the reasons I had left Westboro. I couldn’t bear the thought of anyone celebrating this. Especially a good friend.
“Of course not!” David insisted. “Why would I be happy?” When I told him what had happened, he said he would pray for my Gramps. And when he returned home to Jerusalem the following week, he would go to the Wailing Wall and put a note in it asking God to help my Gramps. “I hope and pray he gets well.”
Instead of returning to my new home with Chad in South Dakota, I flew to Kansas with Grace, terrified that Gramps would pass before we had a chance to see him. Zach had given us the name of the hospice, and I knew that our best chance at seeing our grandfather would be to show up unannounced. As in the months before I left Westboro, I hated the sneaking around. The church would not want us to see him, and my fear of defying them was still almost paralyzing—but we were his grandchildren. We were his family, too. The miles from Kansas City to Topeka passed in the snowy darkness of midnight, Grace sleeping in the passenger seat as I made my case, my inner monologue growing more outraged by the second. The people charged with my grandfather’s care had cast him out of their family—out of his own church—after all these years. They had isolated him in his most vulnerable hours after a lifetime surrounded by his wife, children, grandchildren, and great-grandchildren. They were using his last days to punish and cajole him into “repentance.” And after all of that, they would surely prevent us from seeing him—the only people willing to sit by his side, to offer a comforting presence to a dying man, largely abandoned by those he had loved and trusted—all so that they could maintain control of a narrative in their minds and in the media. I could already hear them talking dismissively among themselves: We don’t owe these people anything. They didn’t answer to anyone, least of all us.
Pulsing through me was an unmitigated disgust for my family, frightening in its intensity. Had Gramps still been a member of the church, there would have been another member keeping vigil at his bedside at all hours of the day and night—talking with him, reading with him, singing with him. I gripped the steering wheel so hard my nails bit into my palms, weeping bitterly at the thought of the church sentencing him to live out his final days alone, confused, and afraid. Not even I would have envisioned them sinking to such depths of cruelty.
I found Zach the following afternoon and spent an hour reading text messages on his phone, following the progression of my grandfather’s illness—and his status within the church—from day to day. In the beginning, my family’s words were full of tenderness and praise. “We should all be very thankful,” my uncle wrote, “that we have a faithful pastor who genuinely cares for our souls and has—at great personal lifelong sacrifice—fed us with the manna of God’s word without dilution.” I read on through the weeks and months as the tenderness disappeared, replaced by a cold and clinical distance. After my grandfather was stripped of his role as pastor and of church membership, most other members ended all contact with him, as required. And when his health deteriorated further, one of his daughters was designated to handle his care and send daily updates to a select group of trusted church members—my brother Zach among them—while the rest were kept largely in the dark. They couldn’t desert him entirely to Topeka’s medical establishment, lest word of his illness and abandonment find its way into the newspapers that had been closely watching for signs of his demise for at least a dozen years.
My aunt’s messages stopped the day that Zach left, of course, but they were enough. More than a month of daily reports while Gramps had been in professional care. In addition to his many physical problems, the messages spoke of “cognitive decline,” “dementia,” and failing organs that sometimes led to a state of “delirium.” When his body began to improve, a doctor warned that my grandfather would likely not show improvement in his cognition unless he was motivated to, suggesting that the presence of more familiar and comforting voices would help—but Westboro continued its campaign of isolation. My grandfather’s mental condition would be on his death certificate two weeks later, as well, not the cause of death—respiratory failure, pneumonia—but a “significant condition contributing to death”: encephalopathy. Disease of the brain, as Google explained, manifested by an altered mental state. Zach described some of the symptoms that ultimately contributed to my grandfather’s exclusion from the church, and it was abundantly clear that some of his actions were so strange and out of character that he could not possibly have been in his right mind in those moments.
With other symptoms, though, it seemed that his actions weren’t ravings but genuine changes in his perspective, particularly as it related to the church. According to Zach, my grandfather had come to see his congregation as cruel and unmerciful. I remembered my despair at coming to the same conclusion when I was painting in that dank basement: as if we were finally doing to ourselves what we had been doing to others. I believed Zach’s assessment, because in the months before I left Westboro, my grandfather had been one of the few men in the church who was encouraging more kindness, gentleness, and compassion. Only by pride cometh contention, the verse said, and after the new elders took over, Gramps had quoted and paraphrased it often. “If there is no pride, there will be no contention,” he intoned. “Where there is great humility, there will be no contention.” As if he were trying to reform the beast he had created.
But it was too late. He had spent decades inculcating us with an ideology that valued fear and control over mercy and grace. He was the one who had taught church members to have unshakable faith in their own perspective, to believe their judgment was as God’s judgment, with de facto status as infallible. Not even my grandfather could stop the course he had set in motion. Though we, or an angel from heaven, preach any other gospel unto you than that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed. Gramps was the heretic now. His illness was proof not of his age, but that God had condemned him. To church members, dementia was the result of my grandfather’s strange behavior, rather than its cause. If he were a man of God, the argument went, then he wouldn’t have this illness.
I thought of the blind man of John 9. And his disciples asked him, saying, Master, who did sin, this man, or his parents, that he was born blind? Jesus answered, Neither hath this man sinned, nor his parents: but that the works of God should be made manifest in him. The story—along with the entire book of Job—showed clearly that not all illness was punishment for sin.
Westboro knew better, though.
Shortly before he was removed from church membership, as Zach told me, our grandfather had stepped out the front door of the church to address the young people running the Equality House across the street. A nonprofit called Planting Peace had bought the house in 2012 and painted it in the colors of the rainbow, the global symbol of the LGBT rights movement. It was a perpetual monument standing in opposition to the church and its message of judgment and damnation. “You’re good people,” Gramps called out to them from across the street, before he was hustled back inside by Westboro members. At the church meeting where he was excommunicated, the elders gave this incident as the clearest evidence of my grandfather’s heresy—casting his lot in with the Sodomites—and judged that he was lucid when it occurred.
Given all the harm Gramps had sown during his life, I knew that many would find an end-of-life change of heart to be too little, too late. That if they could witness his devastating end, some would rejoice in it the same way that he had done to others for so many years. They would see my family’s cruel treatment of him as righteous recompense for a man who beat his wife and children into submission, who used his considerable resources to attack and antagonize the world without compunction. I could already hear their arguments, and though I wanted to defend him—“But his decades of civil rights work!”—I had no real rebuttal. Still, I couldn’t stop the overwhelming sense of hope that washed over me. My own change of heart and mind had already made me optimistic about the same potential in others—and now with evidence that even someone like Gramps could experience this kind of change, the idea of completely writing anyone off seemed senseless.
After I hugged Zach and handed his phone back to him, I picked Grace up from school and pointed my car to the Midland Hospice House. I drove past Gage Park and the corner where we had first taken our signs to the streets, past the pond where my father had taken us to feed the ducks when we were kids, and pulled my car into the most remote section of the hospice parking lot—just in case my aunt showed up. Grace and I stepped out and looked at each other across the hood of the car, assessing. What was out of place? Our earrings, we decided. We removed them while debating whether Grace should put her hair up. “It doesn’t look cut!” she insisted. We didn’t want to upset him.
The woman who greeted us at the front door looked suspicious when I asked for Fred Phelps. “And you are…?”
“His granddaughters,” I said firmly.
She looked doubtful. “Let me check with his nurse.”
The nurse rounded the corner a moment later. “You’re the one who called from California?” she asked. I was. The nurse gave me a sad little half smile, nodded, and led us down the hall to the door of his room. “This is him.”
I put my hand on the doorknob and paused. “Is he … lucid?” I asked.
“Yeah. At times, he is. At times, he is.”
I nodded and stepped carefully into my grandfather’s room. The waning light of dusk drifted in through the window over his bed, brightened by the warm glow of a few lamps scattered around the room. The television was on, as so often it had been in his bedroom back home, but he wasn’t paying attention to it. Grace stood just outside the door, waiting to see how he would respond. Would he be happy to see us? Or was he of a mind to rejoin the church, viewing our visit as a hindrance to that goal? Was the disdain he felt the day I left still seething? My heart clenched at the thought. His last words to me still reverberated often in my thoughts, that bitter, biting tone. I thought we had a jewel this time. The last thing I wanted was to dredge up bad memories for him. If he showed any sign of being upset at our presence, we would leave immediately.
But there were no such signs. The head of his bed was elevated, and when I approached, he looked over at me with recognition and welcome. I couldn’t understand almost anything he tried to say at first—he was so weak, his mouth so dry, his voice so far from the booming proclamations he had delivered from the pulpit all those years. But his eyes seemed aware, and he laughed at me when I tried to interpret his words. I gave him water when he pointed to his glass, and told him that Grace had come to see him, too. She came in a minute later.
We sat next to him on his bed, me by his side, she near his feet. We realized quickly that he was in and out of lucidity. In his mind, he seemed to be preaching in front of a congregation. He asked me to pass out the hymnals. He wanted to sing. I knew the song as soon as he started quoting the lyrics: When peace like a river attendeth my way / when sorrows like sea billows roll. I searched YouTube and pressed play. “It Is Well With My Soul.” A friend would tell me later that it was a popular funeral hymn. The three of us sang along with the music, Gramps oblivious to the tears pouring down our faces. He prayed to God in thanks for the church and for His help. I held his hand while he started to preach a wedding sermon.
A little time, and he seemed to be in a different place mentally.
“Brothers and sisters,” he said gravely, “I hope you believe that I’m doing my best, and that I’ll continue to do more with pleasure and privilege. I’m not a threat.” He looked at me. I told him that I believed him, and squeezed his hand tight. I imagined him at the center of one of those godforsaken disciplinary meetings. I hated their self-righteousness. I hated their sociopathic lack of empathy. Whatever God there might be, He was not in that place.
Gramps didn’t seem to understand where he was until I told him about Libby. She had just given birth to her first child, a son. Paxton, meaning “peace.” I showed him a photo, and he seemed to snap back to the present immediately. “Was he born yesterday?” he asked.
“Two days ago,” I said. I told him we would all come back to see him tomorrow.
He said, “I remember her as a sweet little baby. Just a little baby. And now she’s a mother.” He asked how old she was now.
He looked at Grace and said, “Mama.” He was asking about Gran. I told him that Gran loves him very much. His eyes found mine instantly and he said, “She said that?” I nodded and said yes. I’d heard her say it many times.
“Such a beautiful woman,” he said. “I can never get over how beautiful Gran is. She’s in all you grandchildren and great-grandchildren. So beautiful.” He looked at Grace. “You look so young.” He told her she looked tired. “You need to find a place to lie down.”
He thanked us for coming to see him. He asked if we’d come back and said that he wouldn’t hold it against us if we did, joking like his old self. I kissed his forehead, and he looked at me and said that we were wonderful grandchildren. Just wonderful. That we always were.
“Special,” he said. “So special.” I hugged him for a long time and cried with my cheek pressed against his chest. He lifted his hand and held my face while I did. And when I stood up, he motioned me down as if to kiss me. I put my cheek to his lips, and he kissed it several times quickly, the way he always had. “Muah, muah, muah, muah, muah.” I did it back.
He looked at Grace and said, “Sugar, I just want you to know that I love you.” She told him she loved him, too.
We kissed and hugged him again, and he kissed our cheeks, and we promised to come back tomorrow to see him, all of us unaware that the church would uncover our visit the next day and instruct the hospice to keep us—and every other visitor—away from him. He was drifting off to sleep as we left.
The sun was gone when my sister and I left the hospice, my car automatically steering its way back home. Driving around the block was always the last thing we did before leaving town. For over a year, we had been reaching out to our family here. To share with them the experiences that opened our minds. To remind them of passages we had so long ignored while we were together. To convince them that there were other ways. We knew the messages were unwelcome—not unlike Westboro’s decades of protests—but we sent them anyway and would for years to come. We did not use the bombast of our grandfather or the florid insults of our mother, but the still, small voice I had learned from Chad, from David, from the sassy start-up employee in Chicago, and the hilarious Australian guy, people who learned the lesson that Margie had tried to teach me as a child. A soft tongue breaketh the bone. In the years that followed, I watched in amazement as the signs I most often argued against—PRAY FOR MORE DEAD SOLDIERS; PRAY FOR MORE DEAD KIDS; FAGS CAN’T REPENT—began to disappear from their repertoire, replaced by messages like CHRIST OUR STRENGTH and BE RECONCILED TO GOD. It was all the encouragement I needed to go on. Grace and I use tweets and letters and postcards to reach them, cupcake deliveries and birthday presents.
And just once, we used a sign.
For four years, it sat at the corner of 12th and Cambridge, right in the midst of our old neighborhood. A brand-new bus bench I had noticed on a similar drive just a few months after we left. It had been blank back then, except for a phone number to call if you wanted to buy the ad space. Grace and I had spent over a month trying to figure out what to put on it. What would we say to our loved ones living in the surrounding houses? What was the most important thing to tell them? To anyone driving past, the bench’s message looked like a nonsense saying written in chalk paint, surrounded by brightly colored drawings that belonged in the pages of a children’s book. To our family, it was a reminder. “Goldbugs forever,” it read in Grace’s loopy handwriting. A mistaken iPhone autocorrect for “good night” that became a saying among the siblings.
“Goldbugs, bro.” “Goldbugs, sis.”
A sweet way of saying Good night. I love you.
The drawings were for the children who couldn’t read yet. The ones Grace had always drawn for them. The little sailboat on its choppy waters. The fat, floating bubble man stretching his arms out toward a heart. The jolly baby with a lollipop, a shirt too small to cover his belly, and a bib that read simply FOOD. The interconnected symbols of the sun, the flower, and the swirl. Grace, Bekah, and me, back together as we should be.
And on the back of the bench, a line from a story my sister read to us after Bible study one evening. Another Hans Christian Andersen.
There is always a clinging to the land of one’s birth.
Gramps is gone now, buried unceremoniously in an unmarked grave under the Kansas sun. Yet his church remains. I’m just around the corner from it, right outside my old front door. Gran lives here now, with my mom and my dad and my brothers and my sister. Their hearts beat just inside. I can’t knock, and I don’t pray anymore, but I can wish that it all would end. That the walls they built to keep me out would vanish. I want to tell them that the world isn’t evil. That it’s full and complicated and beautiful and good, filled with unknown truths and unbroken hopes, and that it’s waiting just for them. That I’m waiting just for them. I want to tell them that I love them.
I’ll just have to find another way.




