






4. The Tongue Is a Fire

“Talking to her is like taking a drink from a fire hydrant!” my mother exclaimed with a slight shake of the head. She leaned down to take the paintbrushes from my grubby hands, and for a moment her blue eyes were level with mine—now wide with mischief imagining what it might be like to take a drink from a fire hydrant. “You’re so much like her.” She grinned and kissed my cheek.
I only had a fistful of years under my paint smock back then, but already—and to my greatest delight and honor—the comparisons to my aunt Margie came swift and steady: big hair, big voice, big personality. “Big personality” was sometimes code for “big drama,” but I didn’t know that yet. I adored Margie, and from the way my mother, grandmother, and the rest of my aunts spoke of her, I knew this resemblance to be a very good thing. “She has such beautiful, beautiful hair,” said one. “She is so sharp, just smart as a whip,” said another. “You sure do talk a lot,” said most of them. I couldn’t seem to stop myself, though it didn’t often occur to me to try. Mostly the words tumbling around inside my head mirrored the unruly curls that sat atop it: copious and uncontained, inevitably springing loose from every paltry attempt at confinement.
It fell to my poor mother to shoulder the yeoman’s share of the burden this created. She tried to help me build something inside myself, a sort of internal levee system to keep my mental machinations from flooding every adult conversation in the vicinity—not to mention the rare moments of peace that so seldom found purchase in our household of five children and counting. Although it wasn’t a particular strength of hers, either, my mother worked diligently to teach me the art of holding my tongue, of knowing when to speak—and as with every challenge she faced, her tools of choice were found in the Bible, 1611 King James Authorized Version only. “The tongue is a fire, a world of iniquity,” she would quote. “But the tongue can no man tame; it is an unruly evil, full of deadly poison.”
These verses only served to confuse me for a number of years. I wondered what was so “deadly” about my constant complaints about my four-year-old sister’s horrid behavior toward me. I couldn’t see how my never-ending interrogations surrounding the puzzling characters we encountered on the picket line—“Karl the Fat Fag”—could ever be considered “iniquity.” No matter how much effort my mother invested in the construction of this system, my incipient levees failed miserably, washed away by the endless streams of syllables that surged from brain to open mouth with the force of a great deluge. I wouldn’t have had the vocabulary or self-awareness to convey it at the time, but at the root of all my words was a pathological imperative that has never left me, one that continues to override the usual etiquette of distant, restrained discourse with strangers. I was animated by a set of twin desires that I now understand will never be satisfied: the need to understand, and to be understood.
I grew up considering myself exceptionally fortunate to be surrounded by people who could help me on both of these counts. Conversations with elementary school classmates taught me young that the Westboro way of life was not common—not just our daily protesting, but the fact that nine siblings had settled down in the immediate vicinity of their parents’ home, forming an exclusive, tight-knit community. I pitied the poor chumps who were their parents’ only child and the ones with cousins flung halfway across the country—meanwhile, I had dozens living nearby. My aunts and uncles were my teachers, and my cousins my confidants. Who needed school friends when I had family? There was always someone to talk with. I never had to be alone.
My parents carefully avoided favoritism in our home, but I found myself unable to do the same when it came to my aunts. They took turns cycling in and out of the top spot for various reasons. Rachel was beautiful just like her biblical counterpart, and she shared sticks of mint gum in little foil packets. She’d call me Mickey and find fun ways to teach me new skills—like how to make change while collecting Happy Meals in the drive-through at McDonald’s. Lizz would let me sit in her pew during church sometimes, taking my hand firmly in hers whenever I’d get fidgety; she’d use the pad of her thumb to rub soothing little circles on the back of my hand, so that the move never felt like a punishment. Becky had the most boisterous laugh, and before she got married, she’d come over to watch my siblings and me during the pickets when the weather was too cold for us to attend. We’d play Farkle and crack up each time we’d accidentally-on-purpose call it “Fartle” instead. Abi was the baby of my mother’s family, funny and crass. We’d take turns massaging each other’s shoulders, and she’d remind me of how much I loved to have my hair washed as a baby. How it was the one thing that never failed to calm me down.
Margie, though, would always be particularly special to me. She’d been named for my grandmother, and I for the two of them, though I never used the name outside of official documents. A good name is rather to be chosen than great riches, goes the Proverb, and I had one. Nothing pleased me more than when Margie would drop by and scoop me up to run errands with her—to the bank, the post office, the grocery store, I took any and every chance I could have to be near her. All the comparisons from my loved ones might have influenced me, but I recognized a kindred spirit in her. She’d come in like a whirlwind, a bundle of energy enthusing about one topic or another, whatever she happened to be turning over in her mind in that moment. An epiphany! A revelation! An unexpected turn of events in a case she was working! Can you walk with her while she talks? There’s so much to do, not a moment to spare! Gran would jokingly ponder the absurdity that if Margie was able to speak her thoughts as rapidly as she did, how much faster must her mind be thinking them, unencumbered by the mechanical burden of forming sounds? I say without conceit that this, too, was a problem I recognized. It was a constant source of frustration that I could never make my mouth move fast enough to keep up with my thoughts—even when I was speaking at a pace that made my words unintelligible even to my own ears. (I’m sure it was a still greater source of frustration to my mother. “Would ya slow down, Meg?!”)
Where my mom was Westboro’s logistical powerhouse, Margie was our legal one. They had fallen into these positions in the most natural way possible—not by vote or by fiat, but simply by doing the work. Their roles were dictated partly, even principally, by their place in the family lineup: following the common pattern, the heaviest responsibilities tended to fall to the older Phelps siblings. When the second and third children abandoned the church as young adults, Margie and my mother were left to pick up the slack. Their individual personalities played into the equation, too, of course. My grandfather required much of his children and he held them to the highest of standards, even when society at large would have considered them either too young or too old to be commanded in such a fashion. Other children might have chafed at his rigid requirements, but my mother seemed to have a perpetual sense of urgency about meeting them. Her deep aversion to disappointing her father, her aptitude at pacifying him, and her willingness to use any means necessary to get her younger siblings on board with the program—including physical force, not unlike what my grandfather had modeled—these were the attributes that helped to mold my mother into a combination of something like a political whip and his girl Friday.
This is not to say that she was unaffected by her father’s severe treatment of their family. She told me one day, laughing but abashed, that she and her siblings used to refer to their father as “T.B.” in the notes they left for one another at the law firm: “The Beast.” Still, the accounts I heard over the years from and about my mom left me with the knowledge that any such quiet dissent was about as far as she went in pushing back against his demands. Many years would pass before I felt the least bit unsettled by the striking correlation between her view of her father and her view of God. “You wanna sum up the whole Bible in just three words?” she would ask. “‘Obey, obey, obey!’” It was an approach of appeasement: if only you could work hard enough to placate the strict demands of an exacting taskmaster, his wrath would turn away from you. Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter: Fear God, and keep his commandments: for this is the whole duty of man. For God shall bring every work into judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil. Gramps was not God, but Westboro members were inclined to conflate the moral judgments of the two—in practice, if not in theory—because in spite of his faults, my grandfather had been chosen by God to lead us. Who were we to question His choice?
By virtue of my grandfather’s onerous temperament and our family’s battles with the Kansas legal community, my mother had grown up in what she called a “pressure cooker”—the same phrase she would later use to describe our life working in Westboro’s “War Room,” as the office we shared had been dubbed. The unrelenting pressure through the decades only fed her sense of urgency, and it seemed to have had the effect of making her the embodiment of every cliché about diamonds similarly pressured: hard, abrasive, brilliant. My mother had an eye for identifying the roots of problems and their solutions, and she was almost ruthless in her pursuit of both—even when this meant mowing down our loved ones in the process. Tender as her gentle teaching and sweet encouragement could be, her bitter reproaches at the slightest displeasure would bring me to my knees in a heap of desperate sobs on my bedroom floor, face pressed to the floor and tears sliding down my forehead as I prayed to the Lord for mercy, for Him to please just fix whatever was defective in me to have vexed my mother so.
In those moments of sorrowful prayer in my bedroom—despite all my efforts, why could I not just do things right? What was wrong with me?—I was consumed by terror, frantic at the thought that I had been like Esau all along. The man who found no place of repentance, though he sought it carefully with tears. At each of my mother’s censures I stood on the edge of a precipice, feeling as if I were only a light breeze away from being pitched headlong into the waste howling wilderness of the world, forever cut off from God and His people—and then, finally, awakening to the torments of Hell. Among Westboro members, such was the power of my mother’s judgment. The loyal servant had assumed the role of the new taskmaster.
Margie was often the counterpoint to my mother’s abrasiveness. Her finesse was evidence that she understood people in a way that my mother never seemed to. One afternoon when Margie was picking me up from middle school, she told me a story that I would remember and attempt to emulate for years. At a meeting with her team at the state Department of Corrections, there’d been a discussion surrounding a thorny question. Margie had figured out the answer, but instead of saying so directly, she alluded to ideas that would lead the others in the right direction, giving them the space to work it out and come to a conclusion for themselves. She described her decision to hold back as having two effects: her colleagues had the satisfaction of learning and meaningful accomplishment, and they were more invested in implementing the solution because they had come to it for themselves.
Had Margie’s coworkers been under Westboro’s authority, I knew my mother would have seen them as prideful for being at all swayed by their feelings; after all, they should be invested in the right answer for its own sake, not because they found it. What vainglorious fools they must be! She would have done her best to stamp out that pride forthwith: “You think you’ve got somethin’ goin’ on? You think you know somethin’? This is not about you!” Pride was a destructive force in any human being, and it needed to be eradicated at all costs. Every one that is proud in heart is an abomination to the Lord. But Margie had taken her employees into account—their personalities, how her conduct would affect them—and in her consideration I saw true humility, rather than just the absence of pride. There was a peace in my aunt’s manner that appeared so much more desirable to my eye than the hard lines and harsh tones my mother so often took. I aspired to many of my mother’s qualities—strength, diligence, zeal—but my aunt was a powerful introduction to the idea that these features did not require militancy to survive. That strength abides as fully in restraint as it does in aggression. That the tongue, that world of iniquity of which my mother had so strenuously warned me, could be used in altogether better ways.
By long forbearing is a prince persuaded, and a soft tongue breaketh the bone.

Although the idea of taking a gentler approach resonated with me relatively young, many years would pass before it had opportunity to bloom. “Mildly” was not the way I had learned to speak to outsiders. There would be no mincing of words on the picket line, no euphemisms, no delicacy, no circumlocution. Westboro’s provocations would land us in litigation more than once—including, ultimately, a federal case that reached the United States Supreme Court and had the potential to bankrupt the church many times over—but not even this could convince us to change our ways. Even as the church became more radical and adopted ever-harsher prayers wishing death upon a growing list of enemies, I understood the refusal to recalibrate. One of the first verses I memorized was a command from God to the prophet Isaiah: Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice like a trumpet, and shew my people their transgression, and the house of Jacob their sins. This had been the charge at my grandfather’s ordination at seventeen, and he quoted it ceaselessly—often in conjunction with another phrase he would bellow from the pulpit on Sunday mornings: “WE WERE NOT SENT HERE TO PARLEY!” Ours was a position of strength, our foundation Jesus Christ Himself. Compromise was betrayal. The thoughts of mere humans were irrelevant. In this battle, we would not be the ones to yield.
For all her sophistication and emotional intelligence, not even Margie was above conforming to our antagonism on the picket line and was often cruder than most. When I was nineteen, I stood with my aunt and my Gran on a street corner outside a Seattle hotel hosting an international gay and lesbian leadership conference. With her then-eighty-one-year-old mother standing a few feet away, my aunt waxed vulgar, applying the knowledge Gramps had imparted to us about “scat”—the consumption of feces for sexual pleasure—to an anecdote about an imaginary new drink at Starbucks. “Just go and get yourself a Fececcino!” she brayed, mocking the conference-goers in a tone of prissy faux-refinement. “Add a dollop of feces into your coffee, and then prance in here to discuss your leadership!” The stark contrast between the way Margie behaved on and off the picket line was jarring even to me, but I was of the mind that the obscene nature of my aunt’s words said nothing about her and everything about gays: that they were disgusting and abominable whether she kept quiet about their manifestly abhorrent sex acts or not. I supposed she felt the same.
Our antics at Westboro protests were vulnerable to criticism for any number of reasons, but their remarkable efficacy at garnering attention could never be gainsaid. This was by design, of course; a major piece of the attraction of our un-church-like methods was the thunderous voice it gave us on the streets and in the media. Both our picketing and the media coverage were finite and local in the very beginning, but my grandfather swiftly found ways to colonize the burgeoning power of the twenty-four-hour news cycle for his own purposes. Westboro members began traveling across the country, from gay pride marches in D.C. to the Castro district in San Francisco. Our vehement attacks on public and private figures nationwide were carried by fax machines, and later the Internet, to newsrooms across the country and around the world. Westboro’s relationship with the media became symbiotic almost instantly: they gave attention to our message, and we helped them sell newspapers and generate clicks.
In our estimation, Westboro’s chief objective by far was fidelity to the Scriptures. Apart from that, however, we gauged success primarily by the amount of media attention we received—a fact which garnered no shortage of accusations that we were feigning our faith for the sake of notoriety. People often took our constant employment of shock tactics as cynical and purely attention-seeking behavior, but this was a fundamental misunderstanding of our purpose and the dynamics of the picket line. “Some say you’re just doing this for attention,” one television reporter accused Gramps during an interview I sat in on. My grandfather looked at her like she was uncommonly dense and said slowly, “Well, you’re doggone right. How can I preach to ’em if I don’t have their attention?”
Not only did we firmly believe in the truth and goodness of all our message and methods—including what others wrote off as “shock tactics”—we also recognized that we were living in a sound-bite generation with endless demands on its attention. “You’ve got to speak to people where they are!” my mother insisted. We had a message to preach, and we were going to use every tool in our arsenal to get the job done: sexually explicit signs and insults, parodies and pop culture references, sarcasm and sass. Margie was especially good at writing clever lyrics for our parodies of pop songs, which inspired me to try my hand at them, as well. When we published the recordings of my Lady Gaga parodies on Twitter—Russian roulette is what you’re playin’, silly clod / But every chamber’s loaded when you’re playin’ with your God—her devoted and active fan base whipped themselves into a frenzy, turning our songs into an international news story. No matter how fierce the hostility to our message became, we delivered it with a Cheshire grin: “You’re going to Hell. Have a nice day!” It was important that people understood that our protests were not done in service of any personal hatred, but of the truth of God.
Our belief in predestination prevented us from using conversion numbers as a measure of our success—fortuitous, considering how paltry they were—because whether a person had the faith to believe the truth of our doctrines was in God’s hands alone. In light of this, our goal was not to convert, but rather to preach to as many people as possible using all the means that God had put at our disposal. He would take care of the rest. And he said unto them, Go ye into all the world, and preach the gospel to every creature. He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved; but he that believeth not shall be damned. On the cusp of the twenty-first century, at the dawn of the Internet age, we saw ourselves as the recipients of a divine gift unlike any given to the faithful preachers of yore: a global communications system which we would swarm like a conquering army to spread the Word of God unchecked. Selah.
“You think the Internet was created by God for these pornographers?” Gramps snorted. “The heck you say. He created it for us. For our preaching.”

At first it was a trickle, but then they came in droves. Small-town papers and local TV news segments gave way to Michael Moore’s The Awful Truth and ABC’s 20/20—the former featuring an enormous pink motor home announcing BUGGERY ON BOARD! that Moore had dubbed the Sodomobile. CNN. Fox News. MSNBC. The BBC produced two hour-long documentaries about Westboro that identified us as “The Most Hated Family in America.” We were thrilled to see that our message was beginning to seep into the international conscience, our neon signs and provocative slogans becoming iconic and instantly recognizable. HBO’s award-winning television drama True Blood was a pop-culture phenomenon from its inception through its conclusion in 2014, and for seven seasons, “God Hates Fangs” flashed through its opening credits—a play on Westboro’s infamous rallying cry, “God Hates Fags.” As Westboro’s profile continued to rise, the Phelps-Roper home became a revolving door of journalists and documentary filmmakers from across the United States, the U.K., Australia, Japan, Italy, France, Germany, and more. A few weeks after my grandfather attacked the Swedish royal family following the sentencing of an anti-gay preacher there (“The King looks like an anal-copulator, and his grinning kids look slutty & gay!”), two journalists from Stockholm knocked on our kitchen door unannounced. “Hello!” I smiled at the two gentlemen unfazed. “Can I help you?”
Our campaign against Sweden only intensified when we discovered that the royal court was looking into possible legal action against us under their hate crimes law. With this sort of attention, how could we let go? We added GodHatesSweden.com to our growing list of Internet domains and attacked the country’s leader, Carl XVI Gustaf: “The popinjay King of Sweden—a moral titmouse in the plumage of a peacock, who lives lavishly with his kids on Sweden’s largest social security check—is King of Fags.” My grandfather spun out news releases, and we unleashed the power of our fax machines, sending the missives to every government-related number we could unearth. “The Swedish Royal Court has confirmed that it has been receiving abusive faxes from the fanatical Westboro Baptist Church sect.” (#LedesFrom1991) The technology was antiquated even in 2007, and we found it hysterical that our ol’ Gramps could literally cut and paste together the elements of a press release, “send it out on that little machine,” and stir up the highest levels of the Swedish government.
The campaign wouldn’t be complete without protests, of course. Our policy was not to leave the country and the protection of the First Amendment, but we were undeterred by our inability to travel to picket in Sweden. Instead, we targeted the country through its D.C. embassy and consulates in Chicago, Omaha, Minneapolis, and Portland; the local performance of a Swedish chamber orchestra; a Kansas alcohol distributor whose wares included Absolut Vodka; and a Topeka hardware store that sold Swedish vacuum cleaners. Even we laughed at the dubious connection between the vacuum retailer and a man sentenced to jail for an anti-gay sermon preached halfway around the world, but we were determined to make those Swedes hear the truth about their Sodomite sin—and just as important, to make them feel their impotence, the futility of their resistance to our message. This was God’s Word, and we were His servants. They had no power to stop us. No weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper; and every tongue that shall rise against thee in judgment thou shalt condemn. This is the heritage of the servants of the Lord.
Thanks to my mother’s position in the church, our family was right in the middle of the torrent of activity surrounding Westboro. A few years after the start of our picketing ministry, my grandparents had grown tired of answering the phone calls they received on the church line. Prank calls and death threats came in all day long, but it was just as likely to be a journalist or live radio show. My mother did her best to be good to her parents, visiting often, sending one of us kids down to the church with dinner most nights, and executing the plans that she, my grandfather, and the other elders cooked up. So when my grandparents complained to her about their weariness of the phones, my mother wasn’t going to let her aging parents linger under that burden for a moment longer than necessary. Although she already worked what were effectively three full-time jobs, she was willing to take on another without objection. She had the church phone line forwarded to our home, and suddenly we were the ones on the receiving end of the abuse and media requests. The battle lines had been redrawn, and the picket line had come into our house.
“Hello?” I picked up the phone just after 8 A.M. one day in sixth grade.
“Hey, is there an adult we can talk to?” I told the man there was not; my mother was taking my siblings to school and I was home sick. He asked my age, and I told him eleven. “Okay, let’s talk to you, you’re on the air! What do you think about Ellen DeGeneres?” He snickered to his cohost like he’d told a clever joke. I rolled my eyes. Ellen had recently come out, and Gramps had put her photo on a sign after blackening out one of her teeth and drawing pockmarks all over her face.
“She’s a filthy dyke, and she’s going to Hell for eternity,” I said calmly, and then quoted the best clobber verse against gays from Leviticus: Thou shalt not lie with mankind, as with womankind: it is abomination. I thought for a second, and then added, “Plus, she’s not funny at all.” I hadn’t seen any of Ellen’s comedy or television, but it never hurt to toss in an insult like that for good measure. Margie, Gramps, and my mom gave the most articulate, powerful interviews, and I’d been listening to them long enough to know that switching things up to amp up the shock value was good strategy. I reported the call to my mom when she returned home, basking in her laugh as I recounted my repartee with the radio hosts. Cleverly articulating Westboro’s message would become one of the most reliable ways to earn affirmation from my mother and grandfather, and I cherished every opportunity to do so. Plus, it was fun!
All Westboro members had to be prepared to engage reporters and passersby on the picket line, but with the forwarding of the calls, my mother became the church’s de facto spokesperson. That she worked from home gave her the flexibility to field calls during the workday when almost no one else was consistently and readily available, and her willingness to take on that job meant that Westboro was in the news more than ever before. One-sided conversations with members of the media would ring through our house at all hours of the day and night, our mother celebrating the hundreds of thousands of fatalities in the 2004 tsunami—the Swedish ones in particular—and cataloguing for an Australian radio station all the reasons that Heath Ledger deserved eternal torment. More than one host referred to my mother’s sassy, funny, take-no-prisoners attitude as “radio gold.” Margie was the go-to backup when my mother simply couldn’t spare the time, and they would even tag-team occasionally—one of my favorite things to watch. Each of the women was formidable in her own right, but together, they were indomitable.
I’d begun to formally work for my mother at fourteen—the same age at which she had begun to work for her father—and I both loved and resented that my place was ever at her elbow. I followed her example, finding great joy in cultivating skills for the purpose of “being a good soldier in this man’s army,” as she put it. I memorized phone and credit card numbers so I could rattle them off for my mom at a moment’s notice. I managed the contacts on her phone and the music on her iPod. I designed and maintained spreadsheets to track litigation and tax expenses, and wrote and edited Westboro press releases. I learned accounting to audit the law firm accounts, and Spanish to give interviews to Univision and translate the FAQ on our church website—all before the end of my first year of college. And yet, it often seemed that none of that mattered. My mother could be just impossible to please, and at times I worried that I could never actually grow up under her constant gaze and micromanagement of every detail of my existence.
But when it worked, and all the more as I grew older and learned to accept these constraints, I would cry in gratitude to God for designing this little piece of the world for me, and me for it. My heart swelled when I heard what my mother had begun to call me. “Megan is my right hand,” she would say. Each day I had the privilege of being saturated in our doctrines and these questions of eternal significance. I often likened my mother to the hub of a wheel: all roads led to her as she went about orchestrating the day-to-day operations of the church. It became my greatest treasure to support the work of this virtuous woman, to be given a front-row seat for the drama that was forever unfolding before the Church of the Lord Jesus Christ. These were the wars of the Lord, and they would be remembered from everlasting to everlasting.
The peace I felt in my role was thanks in no small measure to Margie. Given our similar personalities, she sympathized with how difficult it could get for me at home. She, too, was put off by my mother’s particular, carping nature—and so when things went south with Mom, it was Margie to whom I turned for succor. Nothing ever got me back on track faster than the gentle entreaties of my beloved aunt. She sent me a message one day just before my twenty-fourth birthday, and I printed it out and kept it in the top drawer of my desk as a daily reminder. I could hardly read my mother’s emails of correction for the dreadful cacophony they sounded in my mind, full of misplaced accusations of deliberate sabotage and the rage of ALL CAPS. Margie was the epitome of kindness. Of reasonableness. Her email read in part:

Hello little Megan whom I love.
You have been near and dear to me since you were born, and you are one of my most favorite people in all the world. More important, I am convinced God has done a work on your heart, and you desire to serve Him.
Like all of us, you have specific struggles in the flesh. It is a piece of rebellion, and it comes out the most with your mother. I know you know this, and you work at it. But you hang on to a piece of pride that is a danger spot for you. You wrap around the axle about how she says it or when she says it or what she says it about, and rationalize that you don’t understand why.
I know you know that your mother loves you dearly and watches for your soul. I am so thankful that you are comfortable speaking your mind and heart to me, and never want that to go away. But it would be such a disservice to you if I didn’t tell you from a few steps back that your ever-so-intense God-given-talented sweet self, you kick against the prick of your mother’s words of instruction and direction. She is the boss of you, Megan, and always will be. If you can’t submit yourself to her, you can’t submit yourself to this body, plain and simple. Sometimes some humble, quiet submission is the order of the hour. And you must work at seeing that and getting to that spot.
You have such a spirit of joy and rejoicing and exuberance about serving God, but when you get in that little corner of rebellion with your mom, you are like a completely different person. You are tense, tight, hard, and preoccupied. It’s Satan messing with you, little love. And you must resist him, and you have the promise of your Creator that he will flee.
Obedience and submission are such sweet comfort to our soul, and such a strong antidote against the enemy we face daily called our flesh. I love you, Megan, and I hope most fervently that these words are right and help your soul.

A soft answer turneth away wrath: but grievous words stir up anger.

In the middle of our second decade of daily protests, change came to Westboro. To say that we had already cultivated an atmosphere of unbelievable hostility would be an understatement of epic proportions—and yet I was blind to it for many years, rationalizing it for many more. Whether it came to me from Margie or my mother, my uncle Tim at a picket or Gramps from the pulpit, there was always a well-articulated justification for each extreme measure we took. By my late teens, I had begun to describe Westboro as “aggressively defensive”: we were only responding to the malice that had been unfairly heaped upon us. We had not started this fight, but America, “Land of the Sodomite Damned.” Steeped in a church culture that demanded we disregard, dismiss, and disdain “unacceptable” feelings of every kind—both within the church itself and among the community without—we became desensitized to the reality of the havoc we were wreaking on the lives of our targets. The only pain that mattered was ours.
Fourteen years after we began at Gage Park, this injurious spirit prompted an expansion of our preaching. Our country had declared war on God by granting its imprimatur to the sins of fornication, divorce, remarriage, homosexuality, and the “God loves everyone” lie—and in punishment for those sins, God had dragged America into two wars, the casualties of which were being mourned and their lives celebrated on the news almost daily. In response, we would develop a new campaign that would bring the masses face-to-face with an aspect of our ministry that had previously been reserved for well-known figures and locals who had wronged us: our sinister celebrations of death via protests at funerals. The impact of this shift was seismic, culminating in a five-year battle that would land Westboro before the nine justices of the nation’s highest court—and in the beginning, I was filled with consternation.
“Mom!” I urged, “Can you please slow down a little?”
It was the summer of 2005, and the War Room was overrun by children of all ages. Westboro kids from around the neighborhood had gathered here the way they did most mornings when school was out, waiting to collect their assignments. The older ones of us would stain the fences or mow the lawns or fill up holes in the yard with topsoil, while the younger ones might pick up trash, pull weeds, or chop vegetables from the garden. When my mom’s almost-celestial salsa was ready, the kids would take the fruits of their labor home with them in mason jars. My mother coordinated the program like a day camp for the righteous, another task she had assumed when she realized how pointless and unedifying it was for children to be idle at home, watching television and playing video games while their parents were off at work. Instead she would lead us in an hour or two of maintenance work in the morning, pickets before lunch, and then we’d regroup in the Phelps-Roper basement. The big room was mostly used for church gatherings, like the parties we’d throw to celebrate all the birthdays that fell during that month. In the summer, we would rearrange the tables for a group Bible study my mother would lead, with Margie and other Westboro members pinch-hitting on occasion.
But on this July morning, I needed my mother’s attention. She had just announced that our family would travel to Omaha, Nebraska, in the next day or two: we were going to protest the funeral of a soldier who had been killed in Iraq. At my grandfather’s behest, Westboro had begun this crusade just a few weeks before, and I had struggled to make sense of the logic behind it.
“What is it, hon?” my mother pulled in close to hear me over the chattering kids.
“I’ve been listening to Gramps and everyone, but I just don’t get it. I need to understand why we’re doing this. If someone comes up to me and asks me why we’re picketing soldiers’ funerals, I’m not going to have an answer!” At nineteen, I was disturbed by the fact that I couldn’t articulate the Scriptural support for our new position. I’d been picketing for fourteen years by that point. I had memorized countless Bible verses and was always working on more. One of my grandfather’s favorite refrains was that “The key to memorization is attention; and the key to attention is interest.” His implication was that the only cause of a failure to memorize was a failure to care—and I cared. I could answer the toughest questions slung at me whether they came from a gentle stranger or an angry reporter with a microphone and a huge camera stuck in my face. Be ready always to give an answer to every man that asketh you a reason of the hope that is in you with meekness and fear.
“Well, we better go talk about it. This is an important subject, and it’s gonna keep coming up. And if you’ve got this question, I’m sure these other kids do, too.”
A while later, my siblings and I were seated in our usual places around the living room, Bibles open and ready to listen. “Okay, children,” our mother began, “we are going to connect the dots here!” And that’s what she proceeded to do for the next half hour.
The dots, my mother explained, were (A) sin, and (B) punishment. These two were inextricably connected, and the former was the proximate cause of the latter. (This was the actual vocabulary my mother used when she spoke to us; as an admirer of beautiful words, I found it a sincere joy.) Moses had once given the children of Israel an ultimatum: Behold, I set before you this day a blessing and a curse; A blessing, if ye obey the commandments of the Lord your God … And a curse, if ye will not obey the commandments of the Lord your God.
So far, so good. This had been part of our reasoning for protesting all along: warning the world that their sin would bring the curses of God upon them.
“I think we understand that part,” I told my mother. “But why soldiers’ funerals specifically?”
“Well, can we all agree that a dead child is a curse from God, and not a blessing?” she asked. We all nodded. She’d begun to use the word “child” to describe the dying soldiers, because a significant portion of them were exceedingly young. Many were around my age and even younger.
“Okay, now flip over to Hosea chapter nine,” my mother instructed. I read along with her and began to memorize: They have deeply corrupted themselves … therefore [God] will remember their iniquity, he will visit their sins. Though they bring up their children, yet will [he] bereave them, that there shall not be a man left.
“America has deeply corrupted themselves! Adultery, fornication, fags, and so forth. They worship those sins, and now the Lord is visiting them for it—and one of the weapons in His arsenal is killing their soldiers in battle!”
They chose new gods; then was war in the gates.
For there fell down many slain, because the war was of God.
If thou wilt not hearken unto the voice of the Lord, he shall cause thee to be smitten before thine enemies.
I wrote the verses down. I would repeat them again and again until they stuck.
“And there is one more piece to this picture, children,” my mother continued. “Most of these military deaths are being executed by I-E-Ds. ‘Improvised—explosive—devices.’ It means homemade bombs. Do you remember that this evil nation bombed this church with an IED ten years ago? Back then, people didn’t even know what an IED was. And now everyone knows! That, children, is the vengeance of God. It is the picture of that verse that talks about their violence coming back on their own heads. Can somebody look that up?” It only took me a few seconds to find it.
His mischief shall return upon his own head, and his violent dealing shall come down upon his own pate.
Vengeance is mine; I will repay, saith the Lord.
The righteous shall rejoice when he seeth the vengeance: he shall wash his feet in the blood of the wicked.
This last piece of the puzzle was not so compelling to me. Although I understood and believed the verses about God’s avenging of His people, my mother and grandfather seemed to vastly overstate the magnitude of the bomb incident each time it came up. I was nine years old when a few college students set off a pipe bomb in our driveway, blowing small holes in the fence and in our van. The blast was strong enough to shake off heavy wall hangings just over the bassinet of my new brother, Gabe, four days old and sleeping in my parents’ bedroom just over the driveway. It had been unnerving to be sure, and perhaps I’d just grown accustomed to glossing over such incidents—but to claim that this was the cause of the suffering of the entire United States military felt exaggerated and uncomfortably arrogant. I thought it was better to focus on the main cause—that protesting soldiers’ funerals was about America’s disobedience to God, showing the causal connection between the nation’s sins and its military deaths. I suspected others felt the same, because Mom and Gramps were the only ones I ever heard making the argument about the pipe bomb.
“I understand now,” I told my mother. “What time do we leave for Omaha on Saturday?”

The military pickets quickly took over our schedule. Within ten weeks of the first funeral, Westboro had dispatched nearly two dozen groups of protesters, everywhere from Caldwell, Idaho, to Marblehead, Massachusetts. Hundreds more would come in the years that followed. We gathered a team of aunts and cousins, designing an entire apparatus whereby we could keep abreast of the protest opportunities. Given the last-minute, fast-unfolding nature of the events—the bodies would need to be buried quickly—we would have to be prepared to act in an instant. We decided that one of my aunts would monitor the deaths announced on the Department of Defense website, and assign individual soldiers to church volunteers on a rotating basis. These volunteers would then search the media for information about the soldiers as well as their funeral announcements. As soon as they had the time and place of a funeral in hand, they would call my mother or me and we’d swiftly resolve the question: Would we be able to make the trip to picket this funeral?
The result depended almost entirely on logistics. Was the funeral occurring in a place we could reach by car in ten hours or less? If so, the answer was generally yes. Were the tickets to fly there prohibitively expensive? If so, the answer was usually no. Was the funeral yesterday? Clearly, this picket was not meant to be—but we would need to be more vigilant if we didn’t want these opportunities to elude us. If a given trip seemed possible, my mother would send a message to church members and ask who, if anyone, could go. Our decisions were based on the same constraints that govern the lives of every other red-blooded American: work and school obligations, the availability of vacation time, how much travel we had already scheduled ourselves for, and money. Other than parents for their minor children, we each paid our own way. (Although on one occasion, an older cousin of mine used his work bonus to distribute birthday gift certificates granting the recipient up to $200 toward a picketing plane ticket. Elation!) If at least three people could attend, my mother and I would immediately begin assembling the necessary elements for the trip: plane tickets, hotel and rental car reservations, driving directions, and all of the biographical information published about the soldier in the media. The travelers would need to know just what sort of sinfulness the deceased had been up to in the event that anyone were to ask why we were picketing this soldier specifically. If Mom wasn’t sure, she tended to go with the catchall: “You mean it isn’t enough that he was fighting for a nation that has institutionalized sin and made God their number one enemy?”
The outpouring of fury and grief at these protests startled me in the beginning. We stood near the church in Omaha and lifted up our new signs—THANK GOD FOR IEDS, THANK GOD FOR DEAD SOLDIERS—but the scene was devoid of our usual protest antics. We did not sing parodies. We did not dance atop the American flag. We did not call across the narrow street to the soldiers standing just outside the church’s entrance. They watched us with bitter contempt, and I couldn’t recall seeing anything quite like it in all my years on the picket line. The family arrived in a limousine, stepped out, turned. Though there were police officers stationed between us and them, the close quarters felt like a tinderbox. Both sides afraid to speak, both sides afraid to make any quick movements lest the precarious peace erupt into all-out war.
It was only a matter of time before it did.
As a result of our new campaign and the attention and hostility it generated, violence against Westboro spiked again—including arson this time, the most aggressive act perpetrated against the church. Investigators never found whoever was responsible for setting the church garage on fire in the wee hours one August morning, but the fire department arrived to put out the flames within minutes—tipped off by a woman in a nearby drive-through. An electrician arrived the next morning to get the power running again, but as he surveyed the damage, he seemed disturbed. When my mother asked why, he pointed to the narrow space—just four feet—between the charred edge of the damage and the electrical wiring. “If that fire had lasted any longer, the whole block would have gone up.” I’d been shaken watching the blaze and billowing smoke in my pajamas at 1 A.M., but my feelings turned to outrage and defiance with the electrician’s words. Anyone who thought they could scare us out of serving the Lord didn’t know Westboro or God.
Although the arsonists had failed in their attempt to destroy the church with fire, a team of attorneys were determined to use the courts to do the same. Less than a year after our first military funeral protest, a twenty-year-old Marine was killed in a Humvee accident in Iraq. His name appeared on the DoD website, instantly becoming grist for the Westboro funeral mill. The query seeking picketers went forth, the plane tickets were purchased, and the news releases were faxed to media outlets all over the state of Maryland. My grandfather had a way of distilling a message down to its essence, and thus he did in the news release announcing our protest at the funeral of Lance Corporal Matthew Snyder: “They turned America over to fags; they’re coming home in body bags.”
Late on the evening that my mother returned from that funeral picket in Maryland, we sat at our adjacent desks in the still house. My siblings had gone off to their rooms to settle into bed, and Mom and I were winding down, as well. I got up and walked a few paces to stand behind her chair, put my hands on her shoulders, and squeezed gently. She was exhausted. Her head slumped forward while I worked on her neck and shoulders, and after a moment, she spoke softly. She had wept in the car on the way to the funeral, she told me. As she drove, one of her travel mates had read aloud the news stories published about the young soldier. “The father called his son ‘the love of my life.’” My mother’s voice took on that quality of desperate urgency again, of lamentation. “I am a mother. I have eleven children. I get that.” She shook her head. “It is just so sorrowful what these people have done to their children. Does he not understand that his sins have brought the wrath of God down upon his head? Upon his son’s head? Somebody has to tell them!”
I was taken aback to hear that she had cried. This was not the sort of spirit we displayed at funeral pickets. After Omaha, they had gotten progressively more antagonistic, and we now exultantly sang parodies of military anthems in those tense, close quarters: “Then it’s IEDs / Your army’s on its knees / Count off the body parts all gone, two! three!” I had begun to feel hesitant in those circumstances. Family and friends of the fallen were passing by a hundred feet away, and it was impossible not to see their heaviness. Breaching that grief-stricken silence so that we could bellow our defiance made me feel—unwillingly, involuntarily—like a terrible person. I would talk myself out of it, buttressing our position with Bible verses to justify the behavior—but my mother’s tears gave me permission to feel the empathy I’d been afraid to acknowledge. I was relieved to know that it wasn’t wrong to do so.
Less than three months later, my mother got a phone call from a reporter. Our whole family was returning from another funeral picket in Illinois, and we were on the final stretch of the seven-hour drive home. “Lawsuit?” my mother asked. The reporter wanted to know if we had a response to the civil lawsuit that was being filed against us for protesting the funeral of a Marine in Maryland—the allegations were defamation, invasion of privacy, and intentional infliction of emotional distress. It was after hours on Friday evening, but the woman had seen a copy of the complaint that would be filed in federal court come Monday morning. My mother first pressed for details, and then answered with characteristic brazenness: we had the protection of the First Amendment and the foundation of Jesus Christ. No one was going to stop us.
As soon as my mother disconnected the call, the cogs of the Westboro war machine kicked into high gear. She phoned Margie and Gramps, and a plan was hatched. If those men were going to file a lawsuit on Monday, we were going to respond with a press conference on Tuesday. After the case was filed, I emailed and faxed out the press release Margie had drafted to national media outlets: “So long as the families, military, media, veterans groups, and community-at-large, use funerals or memorial services of dead soldiers as platforms for political patriotic pep rallies, we will continue to picket those pep rallies. If they put the flags down and go home, we’ll go home. Not before then.”
The trick was that our press conference would be at Arlington National Cemetery, where Mom, Margie, and I would simultaneously protest another soldier’s funeral. This was not a move I would have thought to make, but all three of them—my grandfather, my aunt, and my mother—had an uncanny knack for finding ways to heighten the drama for the cameras. Addressing journalists was always a bit nerve-racking, but I knew I wouldn’t have to worry about it much with my mom and Margie on the scene.

Before the lawsuit had even been filed, its effect on the church was far-reaching, momentous, instantaneous.
My parents, siblings, and I filed out of the van that Friday evening, into the house, and down to the church. There would be a meeting to strategize about our response. Gramps sat near the pulpit, wary and weary, and we took our pews near the front. True to his extreme nature, my grandfather began hyperbolizing about worst-case scenarios, appearing to grow more sick with fear and paranoia by the minute. Did the court have jurisdiction to force us to stand trial in Maryland? What if they won? Wouldn’t other families begin to sue us in other courts and jurisdictions? What if they made us litigate these funeral pickets all over the country? What if they bankrupted us all? What were we going to do about all this? Most of us waited in silence as my parents, Margie, and the rest of my aunt- and uncle-attorneys weighed in on these questions. They tried to answer him calmly and reasonably, to assuage his rising panic, but the longer the meeting went on, the more they began to mirror his dread.
My grandfather fixed his stare on a nearby wall for a moment, and then spoke matter-of-factly into the strained silence. “The Lord could just kill them, you know.”
And thus we began to pray for the Lord to kill the father of the Marine and his accomplices.
Someone googled the names of the lawyers who were filing the complaint—former JAG officers—and for the first time in all my life, we slid down off our pews and prostrated ourselves on the floor of the church sanctuary. The men took turns making elaborate prayers to God to kill these men that very weekend, before they had the opportunity to attack the Lord’s church in this way. We were the representatives of the Most High God, and we prayed He would show Himself strong on our behalf. Our requests were made in the spirit of King David’s imprecatory prayers—prayers of cursing, invocations of the wrath of God. When David was being pursued by his enemy, he prayed that the Lord would

Let his days be few; and let another take his office.
Let his children be fatherless, and his wife a widow.
Let his children be continually vagabonds, and beg.
Let there be none to extend mercy unto him: neither let there be any to favour his fatherless children.

Our enemies did not die over the weekend, but this pervasive doctrinal shift would affect the church for years to come, pushing us ever more to the extreme. As with Westboro’s decision to shift our focus to military funeral pickets, our new imprecatory prayers caused me significant consternation—but I had trouble discerning its root. King David had plainly made these prayers about his enemies, and God had called David a man after mine own heart. Even Jesus Himself had promised vengeance to His people: And shall not God avenge his own elect, which cry day and night unto him? I tell you that he will avenge them speedily. Clearly, our imprecatory prayers were consistent with Scripture.
But if that was true, why did they unsettle me so?
This was not a line of questioning that I could pursue. I was in the habit of suppressing thoughts that conflicted with the Bible as my family understood it, and by the time I was twenty, that tendency was nearly as second nature as breathing. My feelings were irrelevant. I would sacrifice them on the altar of submission to the church, because that was my first and foremost duty in this life. As Margie had told me in the email that sat in my top drawer: “Sometimes you have to step away from being the one with all the analysis and all the answers, and just submit.”
It is disconcerting—shamefully, unimaginably so—to look back and accept that my fellow church members and I were collectively engaging in the most egregious display of logical blindness that I have ever witnessed. I cannot account for my failure to recognize that our new imprecatory prayers were entirely and fundamentally at odds with our long-standing, oft-professed desire to love thy neighbor, that they were perfect contradictions of Jesus’s command to love your enemies. Both positions had been derived from the Scriptures—but how could we have sincerely held such deeply incompatible views for so many years? It should have been inconceivable in a group of Westboro’s size and intelligence. Still, the partition between the piece of my mind that confessed love for my neighbors and the piece that asked God to dash the young men to pieces was vast, opaque, and impenetrable. That brief spark of nagging discomfort was snuffed out, and I carried on.
A deceived heart hath turned him aside, that he cannot deliver his soul, nor say, Is there not a lie in my right hand?

I had decided to follow my mom and Margie to law school as a kindergartner, but the Snyder lawsuit was the first Westboro case I was able to follow up-close. I’d been too young to understand the broader context and the legal significance of the ones that came before, even though my mother had never been hesitant to teach me about them. And then as I got older, I became skeptical of my mother’s portrayals of the cases, anyway. Margie had an inclination to steel-man her opponent’s arguments—depicting them in the best possible light, and then expertly dismantling them to their foundations, brick by crumbling brick—but my mother tended to straw-man. She presented facts in such a way that our side came out as a paragon of virtue, and our opponents as the nadir of evil. Her analysis was just too intense and one-sided to be objective, and it became important for me to read the records for myself. My mother would always encourage me to do so. She seemed to sense that I’d begun to view her as a bit of an unreliable narrator, but she was confident that examining the primary source material would lead me to the same conclusions she had come to.
As the case progressed, one point became abundantly clear: the Maryland funeral at the heart of this conflict was beset by the worst possible set of facts for the men who had filed the suit. We had protested well over a hundred funerals by the time this lawsuit was filed, and there were times when only narrow spaces had separated us from our targets. We’d stood in clear view of the funeral entrances where our chilling melodies had shattered the silence, echoing off church facades and into the unwilling ears of the mourners, their sorrow at the mercy of our joy:

God sinks your battle ships, you little wimps
Throw out your lifelines, boys
Your time has come to die, die, die, die

There had been no such scene at the Snyder funeral. Police had “stuck us off in the north forty!” as my mother exclaimed. They had used orange snow fencing to corral her and six other picketers into a small area located more than a thousand feet from the church, on public land, and there was no one around to see them but members of the media and law enforcement officers. The picket was over before the funeral began, and the funeral procession had even been routed so that it didn’t pass by Westboro picketers at all. A professional videographer would shoot footage showing that a hill prevented funeral-goers from seeing Westboro’s neon signs from the procession route, though the deceased’s father testified that he’d seen “the tops of them.” We took it as a signal of divine favor that this was the funeral we’d been sued for. God was going to use this lawsuit as a preaching tool, and He was going to lead us to victory such that no other family would dare to take us on over this issue again.
At Westboro, it was all hands on deck. Everyone with any skill would have a part to play. My mother and Margie would be at the helm with their familiar split focus of logistics and law; the other lawyers would help Margie with research and strategy; and the young adults would do the menial but important work of transcribing news stories to use as evidence. We were a well-oiled machine, always shifting to make sure that every need was met. Did a mother have to work late? Another would make sure her children got to the evening pickets in Topeka on time. Had Margie finished writing a brief? Her siblings were standing by to edit. Did anyone seem pressed beyond measure? Bear ye one another’s burdens, and so fulfil the law of Christ.
The Maryland case was a dream for a wannabe lawyer like me. At the time, I was pursuing a degree in business at Washburn University, a small public institution that had been the destination for nearly all Westboro members’ post-secondary education ever since Gramps had graduated from its law school. My time at Washburn didn’t fit the typical experience of college as a time of questioning and independence. The university was located less than two miles from my home, and we had protested there at least weekly from the early days of our picketing ministry—an unlikely place for a Westboro member to find, or even to seek, intellectual freedom. I loved that the university system allowed me to focus on classes and subjects I found most interesting, and it was an improvement over high school in other ways, as well. I was only required to be on campus for classes and had almost no interaction with fellow students outside of that—which made things a lot easier for me. Westboro’s beliefs and public protests had always been such a huge part of my identity, and ever more so as I got older. Having to keep that mostly separated from my life at school—largely ignoring the very most important part of me—hadn’t been easy. In college, I didn’t have to work nearly as hard to maintain that separation. I already had far more distance from my peers, and I also felt less inhibited about using any relevant university assignments as an opportunity to detail and expound on Westboro’s activities—to address how I really saw the world.
I couldn’t wait to get to law school, but in the meantime, I relished learning the nuts and bolts of the Snyder case. The number and scope of legal issues seemed to multiply with each passing day, but one of the central questions was whether a state’s tort law—claims of civil wrongs—could be used to punish speakers whose words and actions would otherwise be protected by the First Amendment. The father of the fallen Marine claimed that Westboro’s words had caused severe emotional injury and deterioration in his health, ruined the memory of his son, and turned the funeral into “a media circus.” Could Westboro be found responsible for those damages? Could we be held liable for “intruding upon the seclusion” of the Marine’s family—even though we had been standing on public land that was far from the funeral and unseen by its attendees? And even if they had seen our signs, was their grief or offense enough to render our words punishable under the law?
In the legal arguments Margie would eventually make, the answer to these questions was a resounding “No.” She argued that even if the court considered the Snyder family to be private figures, Westboro’s speech could not give rise to a cause of action. Because the Marine’s father had repeatedly made public comments about the war in Iraq and published private details about the family, “a church or anybody has the right to answer that public comment.” In protesting the young man’s funeral, church members had only stated their religious opinions on matters of public interest, which falls under “the umbrella of protection under the First Amendment that this Court has established firmly.”
Or as Gramps put it succinctly: “If these cockeyed lawyers can use tort law to do an end run around the First Amendment, then there is no freedom of speech in this country!”

During the years of the Maryland case, my mother would often send me over to Margie’s office to assist her with anything she might need. It gave me the sense of being on loan from one boss to another, but the feeling was a joyful one. There was no higher calling than to be useful to the church, and I cherished the time with my darling aunt as fiercely as I had when I was a little girl running errands with her around Topeka. Now, though, our travels would have us marching toward the nation’s capital.
Westboro had lost at the trial court, and a Baltimore jury issued a stunning $10.9 million verdict against us for protesting the young marine’s funeral. The world had cheered at the idea that this judgment signaled the end of the church—that after two decades of violence and threats, unlawful police actions and impotent legal shenanigans of all kinds, America had finally, finally found a way to defeat Westboro and end our picketing forever. On its face, our loss seemed devastating and insurmountable—but still, the church adopted the sort of position we always took: one of exultation. We were utterly amazed at what the Lord was doing to our enemies. In allowing them to prevail at the trial court, He was lulling them into a false sense of hope. For two years, they reveled in their victory, throwing it in our faces, certain of their triumph. What fools! Did they not yet understand that God was with us? We knew that He would turn our apparent defeat into a victory—and their initial, illusory success would only cause them to rage all the more.
And thus it was. Margie filed our appeal, and the appellate court ultimately reversed the trial court’s decision. They set aside the multimillion-dollar judgment, declaring that Westboro’s speech was, indeed, protected by the First Amendment. No matter who was offended by our religious opinion, Maryland’s tort law could not be used to circumvent our right to free speech.
Now Snyder v. Phelps would come before the United States Supreme Court. The stakes were high, and the stage the most prestigious we’d ever had. We continued to ramp up our efforts with a constant stream of nationwide protests and endless interviews requested by major media outlets from around the world. We were racing to the finish line.
It was September 2010, and Margie and I were making our way to meet with folks from the Thomas Jefferson Center in Charlottesville, Virginia, where Margie would rehearse the tough cross-examination she expected from Justice Scalia and his colleagues. The oral arguments were just a few weeks out, and she was preparing for the most daunting challenge she’d ever confronted as a lawyer, the pinnacle of her legal career. On that Saturday in September, though, one that belonged more to summer than to fall, it was evident that her thoughts weren’t on the case. Instead, as Margie and I walked through an idyllic university community, empty of students and full of autumn leaves in brilliant hues, she put her arm through mine and started to cry.
“This is it,” she said quietly. “This is where I’d be. If the Lord hadn’t saved me … I imagine I’d be a professor … living in a place like this, one of these houses…” She trailed off, and we both walked together like that for a time, contemplating the choices we would have made if we’d had any choice at all. Margie’s words were echoes of a lament I’d been hearing from teachers and journalists for years: that a family as impressive as the Phelpses were wasting our lives and talents tormenting people on the streets. How startling it was to hear it in Margie’s voice, my mind stirring with the beginnings of a subtle realization: that even among the staunchest of us, the sacrifices we made in order to be at Westboro—our insistent rejection of the world outside—weren’t quite as simple and inevitable as they had always seemed.

Gathered on the marble plaza in front of the U.S. Supreme Court, the throng of reporters appeared stunned, and I laughed aloud at their bewilderment. Before them stood over a dozen Westboro members with my mom and Margie at the fore, all of us brimming with adrenaline and positively giddy. Just behind us shone all the imposing grandeur of the Court’s edifice: broad steps leading up to a portico of Corinthian columns and a white marble façade proclaiming “Equal Justice Under Law,” evoking Greece’s Parthenon just as it was designed to. Oral arguments in Snyder v. Phelps had wrapped moments earlier, and I looked over Margie’s shoulder at the assembled mass of cameras and microphones as she and my mother fielded questions from the Supreme Court press corps. Margie had shown deference to the justices and respect for the Court’s pomp and pageantry while we were inside the courtroom itself, but we were back outside now. Our turf. When a journalist made the mistake of asking whether Westboro members ever considered the Snyder family’s feelings, the whole group of us spontaneously burst into song, as one:

Cryin’ ’bout your feeeeeelings
For your sin, no shame!
You’re goin’ straight to Hell on your crazy train!

Dozens of cameras chronicled the incongruity of the scene: the lawyer who had just calmly and cogently expounded First Amendment doctrine to the justices of the nation’s highest court, now leading a band of misfits in serenading America’s leading media outlets with a parody of “Crazy Train” by the British heavy metal vocalist Ozzy Osbourne—in three-part harmony. The footage went viral, and we delighted in the fact that NBC’s camera angle had allowed it to capture one extra piece of the picture: me, standing just behind my mom and Margie, lifting my hand for a high five and laughing with a cousin who promptly indulged me. “That’s our answer about feelings,” Margie told the crowd of dismayed reporters as we stood giggling just over her shoulder. “Stop worshipping your feelings, and start obeying God!”
The Osbournes issued a statement the following day, “disgusted and appalled that WBC would use Ozzy’s music to represent such hateful and despicable beliefs.”
It was perfect.
We knew that the Court wouldn’t deliver its opinion for several months, and after a long year of litigation involving courts in Nebraska and Missouri, too, I expected something of a lull in the interim. Instead, the six months following oral arguments were among the most intense the church had ever seen. The explosions of media coverage wherever we roamed, the growing mobs of angry counterprotesters, the teams of journalists who continued to arrive on our doorstep—all of it was proof that God was with us, strengthening our hands for this good work, and causing our efforts to prosper. I loved every second of it. My place as my mother’s right hand came with high standards and high costs, but I paid them happily, growing more devoted to our cause with each passing day. The world held no allure for me. How could it? I was squarely in the middle of a sea of activity that was being attended to by the angels of God, ministering spirits sent forth to minister for them who shall be heirs of salvation. That was us: “heirs of salvation.”
Living in my parents’ home as a single, childless woman with a college degree and a flexible work schedule, I had the freedom and financial wherewithal to journey far and wide to propagate the church’s message. A few days after we returned home from D.C., I traveled to New York to picket gays and Jews. A week later, to Idaho and Washington State to protest schools. Ten days after, to Michigan for Muslims and more Jews. And then off to a Jewish convention in New Orleans, where God led us to a serendipitous post-picket encounter with former Israeli prime minister Ehud Barak and his security detail, pausing a few feet away to listen carefully to our somber parody of the Israeli national anthem: Wrath will soon pour on you for your awful sin / Your great affliction, it will soon begin. The next week, a soldier’s funeral in Maryland. A high school in Ohio. A Philadelphia television studio for a debate between my mother and Senator Arlen Specter. New York to be on the Mike Gallagher Show in lieu of protesting the funerals of the victims of the Tucson shooting that killed a nine-year-old girl and injured U.S. Representative Gabby Giffords. The funeral of a sledding accident victim in Oklahoma. The Super Bowl in Texas. The Grammys. The Oscars. Interviews in Spanish with a television crew from Barcelona. The Sundance Film Festival, where the director Kevin Smith—my longtime Twitter nemesis—counterprotested us following the premiere of his Westboro-inspired film Red State. (I’d gotten Smith’s attention back in 2009, when comedians Michael Ian Black and Rainn Wilson—and their millions of followers—came after me for tweets I’d posted in celebration of World AIDS Day: “Thank God for AIDS! You won’t repent of your rebellion that brought His wrath on you in this incurable scourge, so expect more & worse!” I was twenty-three, and this was some of the earliest success I’d found on Twitter. When the kerfuffle reached Smith, who was best known for his films Clerks and Dogma, he launched what would become a years-long Twitter campaign to #SaveMegan, in which he regularly encouraged his millions of followers to inundate me with messages persuading me of the errors of Westboro’s ways. GOD HATES PHELPS, his picket sign at Sundance read, EXCEPT MEGHAN—GOD THINKS MEGHAN’S HOT. I forgave him the mockery and misspelling of my name. It was good press.)
I traveled with my mother and Margie as guest speakers invited to university classes, to a college media convention in a Times Square hotel, and to the FBI National Academy at Quantico, whose primary purpose seemed to be a thinly veiled experiment in psychoanalysis—an attempt to understand the perspectives of extremists. Each of these was a fascinating engagement with communities that had long despised us. My laptop accompanied me everywhere, and I’d connect it to classroom projection systems so I could show the class in real time that the Bible really did say what we claimed it did. Everywhere we ventured, it seemed, the city would explode in outrage. The tongue is a fire. These that have turned the world upside down are come hither also. The events of those six months brought more sustained attention, exposure, and legitimacy to the church and our message than ever before, and a spirit of triumphalism and invulnerability took hold of Westboro. I found myself completely in its thrall, blind to the peril until it was too late.




