






6. The Appearance of Evil

Right around the time the world began to unravel, my mother was recovering from surgery. She was supine in the king-sized bed she shared with my father, one set of pillows stacked beneath her knees and another propping her torso up against the tall, chestnut-colored headboard. My father was always on the lookout for ways to make her life easier, and he’d found her a small bed-desk from which she was now working. Aside from the whirring of her laptop, a companionable silence filled the room. I sat in the chair at her bedside with my feet tucked under me, writing a letter to my sister.

Dear Grace Eliza, Sister-mine, Trouble-maker, Friend—
Photography is where you shine, but you also have a way with words that’s truly your own. I think this [Field Notes Book] is perfect for you, and I hope you’ll write down the story of the little orphan girl who wanted to be a pirate (changed my life!) and Adventures of Mini Megan and other important things that strike your keen eye. I’m so thankful to walk this path with you, dear heart. So. Very. Thankful.
With all my love to my baby sister (and favorite shopping partner ), I am
Yours always,
Megan Marie

I was newly smitten with my anonymous friend, and he had just turned me on to these pocket-sized Field Notes Brand notebooks. The one in my hand was a special edition allowing for custom headlines, and to its blank cover I had delicately applied dry transfer decals to give it the title THUG LIFE in the chic Futura typeface beloved by hipsters everywhere. All for the irony, of course. My eighteen-year-old sister was no more a thug than I was a hipster, but it was fun to knowingly pretend, mocking both ourselves and the identities we took on. In spite of our skinny jeans and liberal deployment of gangsta rap lyrics in daily conversation, we had the self-awareness to know that we could never convincingly pull off these characters—“The Notorious M.E.G.”—all of which were especially ridiculous and giggle-inducing given that we were members of a despised religious group, both of us still living at home and required to obtain our mother’s permission to leave the house even for short periods. The juxtaposition was the joke. “The world is doomed, but check out these shutter shades and old-timey newsie outfits!”
I looked up from the notebook as my mother set aside her computer, her eyelids turned down at the corners. Exhausted. Uncomfortable. Impatient. We were in the throes of the travel and media frenzy following the Supreme Court arguments, and this compulsory downtime was getting to her. The surgery had aimed for pain relief in her lower back, and as she curled her body away from me in preparation for a brief afternoon nap, I eased myself into the space beside her and pressed my thumbs firmly into the flesh on either side of her spine. Ours was a physically expressive family, my parents and the sisters in particular: Bekah, Grace, and I. Massage had long been a casual, regular occurrence in our home—so common, in fact, that I’d developed a Pavlovian response to my sister’s approach: goose bumps would appear all over my skin even before Bekah had begun to smooth away the tension she found in my neck and shoulders. She and I often spent evening Bible studies standing over our parents as they read aloud, working through the knots that had collected in their muscles as they spent long hours sitting at a desk, or laboring in our overflowing vegetable garden, or picketing on a breezy day with two signs in each hand (“the Butterfly”), or—in our father’s case—commuting 140 miles round-trip each day for his job in Kansas City.
“Thank you, sweet doll,” my mother mumbled into the pillow. My hands began the familiar trek around each shoulder blade in turn, along the spine, across the span of her low back, and then reversed direction upward, returning to the pliable skin of her neck. The pressure I applied was alternating at regular intervals, muscle memory taking over, and I continued until her breaths came slow and steady. A few minutes longer to ensure she wouldn’t rouse, and then I slowly, deliberately disentangled myself.

My mother’s troubles began with an email. My parents tried to keep it under wraps at first, and they managed to shield my siblings for a short time, but I was twenty-five. For years I had spent most hours of most days directly in my mother’s orbit. Though I didn’t know its cause, her distress was apparent to me. She and my father were spending an inordinate amount of time in heated conversation that became hushed on my approach.
After a day or two of gentle pressing on my part, my parents finally allowed me to see the message—just once, and only on my father’s iPhone for a few short moments. He hovered, antsy, so I read in haste before he could take it back. It was a disciplinary email from my eldest brother, Sam—just thirty-two at the time—and Steve, a former documentary filmmaker who’d converted and joined Westboro a decade earlier. My stomach turned as I read the accusations, which primarily surrounded the harsh, unmerciful way she could treat others in the church. I knew as well as anyone that my mother could be too zealous in correcting other church members. I’d frequently found myself on the wrong end of her sharp tongue, and I’d had a front-row seat as most of the others had, as well. Still, no one could deny that her vehemence was borne of a desire to do right by the Lord and by us, and that—as Margie had rightly noted in her message to me the year before—my mother’s hard edges had been softening for some time now. She had a remarkable tenderness that had been an example for me all my life, the very embodiment of God loveth a cheerful giver. She sacrificed for our loved ones tirelessly, the result of an uncanny ability to discern our needs and an unparalleled determination to fill them, no matter what it cost her.
I felt strongly that the case against my mother was overstated, and I was upset that these two men had chosen to stir things up while she was still recovering from surgery. It was a cowardly assault at a time when she was most vulnerable. My father seemed to agree. I could see that he and my mother were gearing up for a fight, preparing her rebuttal—which was also disheartening. I didn’t want my parents to completely discount what this email was saying, because there was some truth to the criticism. I wanted my mother to hear the legitimate critique at the heart of this email, but in overplaying their hand, Sam and Steve had offered distraction that allowed for easy dismissal. Was someone finally going to address this issue that had been a grief of mind to so many of us at various points, only to blow it with narrow-minded and overblown contentions?
It took time for me to recognize this disciplinary message for what it was: the cynical use of a genuine problem—my mother’s abrasiveness—to upend the existing structure of the church. From the moment he’d joined Westboro, it had been apparent to me that Steve wanted to take over. He’d stated his desire for leadership plainly, but was thwarted by the biblical requirements of a church leader—that he could not be a novice, lest being lifted up with pride he fall into the condemnation of the devil. I’d viewed this naked ambition as an awkward fact of church life. Now that he was not a novice, however, he appeared to be shifting focus to the other obstacle to his rise to power: the longstanding influence of my mother. For Steve, it seemed to me, her sidelining was a stepping stone.
I’ll never know exactly what occurred in the conversations that followed this email, because a fundamental transformation took hold of the church almost instantly. Throughout my life, constant, unguarded communication had been all but an object of worship at Westboro. Dozens of emails and text messages flowed through the church’s distribution lists each day, covering everything from media and lawsuits, to childcare and lawn maintenance. Members saw one another at protests, hymn-singing gatherings, the family law office, and in our common backyard. We ate dinner together, read the Bible together, exercised together. We congregated frequently for “work crews,” where teams of us would put up drywall, paint fences, make signs, mow lawns, and have “cleaning parties” at construction sites to build additions onto members’ houses. At 6 A.M. on snowy winter mornings, roving bands of young men and women would wander the neighborhood with our shovels to clear sidewalks and driveways so the mothers wouldn’t have to work so hard to get their children to school on time. And throughout it all, we spoke openly of our struggles and triumphs, the state of our souls, the focus of our recent Bible studies and how these ancient lessons applied to current events and our own lives. “Communication is the key!” wasn’t just an incidental part of our culture—it was how a group of eighty people managed to maintain such remarkable unity in executing both the endless logistics of communal living and an astonishingly effective worldwide preaching campaign. Then they that feared the Lord spake often one to another: and the Lord hearkened, and heard it, and a book of remembrance was written before him for them that feared the Lord, and that thought upon his name.
This email marked the end of an era, though I couldn’t know it at the time. Since I wasn’t privy to the discussions about my mother’s behavior, all I could do was watch with trepidation as events unfolded in front of me. First there were the apology emails from my parents to the church: “Beloved of God—I have offended people over the years with a hard, undisciplined tongue. It is so very wrong and shameful. Please accept my apology and please forgive me. Self-justification is an amazing thing. Please pray for me that the Lord would take away the blinders and heal me of this most important of all illnesses. I love you. I’m so very sorry for the offense I have caused.” Then there was the response from an aunt: “We will do better to help you both because we love you dearly.” And then came the punishments.
My mother would no longer arrange the pickets in Topeka. She would not prepare the monthly events calendar. She would not orchestrate our cross-country protests. She would not coordinate childcare or media schedules. For the foreseeable future, my mother would not be allowed to give interviews at all. My father tried to defend her against the onslaught, to push back against the extreme penalties, but this only resulted in threats of further punishment: if my parents failed to submit to the judgment of the church, anyone over eighteen who was living in their home would move out and live with other church members. My parents would be shamed and ostracized by their own children.
That final threat was reported to me via a phone call from an aunt who spoke in a reassuring voice. I stood in the dark in the office I shared with my mother, staring out the window into the spring afternoon as my aunt explained that my parents were “in a very bad way.” That I shouldn’t worry, because the church was not going to let anything bad happen to my siblings and me. As if our parents were a threat to us. I was stunned listening to the sudden shift in how the elders spoke, their tender and heartfelt praise for my parents’ boundless dedication and sacrifice abruptly decaying into a noxious contempt. The rot had set in almost overnight. I’d kept quiet for days as I tried to understand what was happening, but when my aunt explained that they’d threatened my parents with removing us from our home, my response was visceral. I felt my lip curl as I nearly erupted in a menacing “Just you fucking try.” The thought shocked me into keeping my silence—had I ever in my life felt such a thing against the Lord’s church?—and a moment later my aunt ended the call.

We may have reached the age of majority, but I couldn’t bring myself to employ the term “adult” in reference to myself or any of the siblings now staring at me expectantly. I’d called them together as soon as they arrived home, two brothers and two sisters, all between the ages of eighteen and twenty-four: Bekah, Isaiah, Zach, and Grace. We stood in the back living room, and I closed the door so as not to alert our four youngest brothers, who were doing homework and playing video games in the next rooms. I looked around before opening our meeting: Isaiah and Zach wore stoic expressions, Bekah’s brow was deeply furrowed, and Grace—the only one already aware of our purpose here—was unsuccessfully attempting to mask her outrage. I tried to be neutral, but I couldn’t keep the edge out of my voice as I recounted the day’s events.
During the discussions among the elders, it had apparently occurred to someone that my siblings and I might have an opinion about being forced out of our parents’ house. The home we had shared every day of each of our lives. I’d received a follow-up call asking that I speak with my siblings so that we could come to a decision—which was yet another bizarre development. Children were never asked to make independent decisions. As baptized members of the church, the five of us had a duty to shun those who walk among you disorderly. The question for us seemed to be: Did the Phelps-Roper children feel we could live with our quarrelsome parents and still serve the Lord as we ought?
I posed the question to my siblings, concluding with a firm “I see no reason to do this, and I have absolutely no interest in leaving.”
“Me, neither,” Grace piped up. Isaiah and Zach agreed.
Jaw set and brow still furrowed, Bekah looked perturbed but nodded slowly. The pressure to punish our parents was evident, and we all felt it. I was proud of my siblings for resisting.
“Okay,” I said. “I’ll let them know.”
Grace trailed me out the door and up the back steps to my bedroom. My parents had renovated it for my birthday several years before, replacing the carpet with a serene shade of lilac that complemented the beige drapes. I loved this space. At the southwest corner of the second floor, it was far from the common areas where my family spent most of our time, a calm among the chaos. I’d lie in bed on warm nights with both windows thrown open to the epic storms of my Kansas summers. Just before a downpour the air would be suffocating, so heavy I could hardly breathe … and then the sky would open and the lightning would flash and the peals of thunder that had spooked me awake as a kid would lull me to sleep.
“What the fuck is going on?”
The “f” word was not really an acceptable use of language in our house, but Grace dearly loved it anyway. It was a pantomime of mischief and defiance; the accompanying wink was always implied. Not today, though. My sister sat down on the bed next to me and held out her hand for my phone. I gave it over, and she began squirreling through my emails and text messages to question me about what she found there. Grace was curious and engaged, and since I was so heavily involved in the central work our mother had always done, there was always more detail about church activities in my messages than there was in hers. She’d been reviewing my phone regularly for a couple of years now, ever since we’d become close—but this would be the last time I gave her free rein. I had grown possessive of my communication with C.G., and though I cherished having no barriers between my sister and me, I did not want to share him. This should have been a neon warning sign to me, but the roiling turmoil in the church was a distraction from my growing feelings for him and enabled my denial.
Grace and I were in a state of disbelief at what was happening to our parents, convinced that it was undeserved and unduly harsh—but there was something else, too. It picked at me the longer we spoke, my apprehension mounting until I finally identified its source:
“Wait a second. Who exactly is making these decisions about Mom and Dad?”
My grandfather had long preached that Westboro was the quintessential New Testament church: “local, visible, autonomous, self-governing, exercising discipline over her members.” The verses addressing church decision-making were myriad, and they made it clear that consensus was required. When church matters came up—especially disciplinary matters—active participation was the duty of every member. Everyone had to vote. Everyone had to agree. Without exception. If even a single member disagreed, no action would be taken. This had been the standard all my life. Fulfil ye my joy, that ye be likeminded, having the same love, being of one accord, of one mind.
The need for church unity was one of our animating principles, the reason we were in constant communion and communication with one another. It’s why we often answered questions from journalists and passersby using the same words in the same order with the same tone. To some, this phenomenon was evidence of indoctrination and coercion, but I never saw it that way. We were of one mind as the Lord required us to be, and these verses showed that each of us had a voice that was integral to the church’s success.
So why were the meetings about my parents taking place behind closed doors?
Grace shook her head, looking as disconcerted as I felt.

In spite of our refusal to leave our home, the threat had its desired effect on our mom and dad: the willingness to distance my siblings and me from our parents sent a clear signal that their exclusion from the church was an imminent possibility. Faced with the apparent fact that the congregation was in full agreement as to the enormity of my parents’ sin and the righteousness of their punishment, my mother and father could reach only one conclusion: that God had blinded and deluded them as to their grievous faults. That their judgment was impaired, their thoughts fatally compromised, and that the only way forward was to trust and submit to the collective wisdom of the church without question. My parents seemed lost and dejected that night when they pitifully thanked my siblings and me for choosing not to leave them. My heart ached for them. They seemed broken—and that was exactly the point. The fight had gone out of them.
Inexplicably, it had not gone out of me.
On an evening walk with my sister-in-law Jennifer, I raged. Working myself into a frenzy, I argued that no part of this process was being done in a Scriptural fashion. Jen kept saying, “You need to talk to the elders.”
“I have! I’ve talked with Margie and Lizz and—”
“No,” she insisted, “the elders.”
I paused, confused. Jen held forth for a few minutes, and it soon became clear that she was not referring to “the elders” as the term had always been used at Westboro: an informal descriptor of all of the older people in the church, men and women of wisdom and experience. Instead she was referring to “the elders” as if they were the holders of a formal position in the church. What…? I thought, surprised and shocked into silence yet again.
At the next break in Jen’s diatribe on submission, I asked, “And who are the elders?”
Fred Jr. Jon. Tim. Charles. Ben. Sam. Steve.
“Your dad is, too,” Jen said, “but he needs to get his house in order.”
All of the older, married men.
I felt sure that my father could not have been involved in this decision, but I was aghast at the rest of them—both the ones who had orchestrated it and those who had acquiesced. It occurred to me that over the course of just a few days, these men had managed to overturn the democratic system, gleaned from Scripture, that had ruled Westboro all my life. Only then did I understand that this had been the ultimate purpose of that email. No doubt they believed they were assuming their rightful place at the head of the church, and Sam and Steve must have seen that my mother had been the only member of the church with enough influence to take a stand against such a hostile takeover, so there were no two ways about it: if these men were going to supplant the church’s long-standing decision-making practices, she had to be neutered.
The new hierarchy they had instituted made it instantly apparent where the rest of us now stood.
They hadn’t even bothered to let us know.

My mother had always laughed at the remarkable resemblance between her sense of humor and Grace’s. Whereas Bekah and I tended to view life through rose-colored lenses, wanting our stories tied up with big red bows and happily-ever-afters, the thought patterns shared by Grace and our mother were often morbid, endlessly playful, and frequently resulted in a group of siblings laughing ourselves to tears. Grace was forever plotting, her mind spinning tales for us at every moment. One day I returned to my desk and found money she owed me for a pair of jeans she’d bought on my credit card. Attached was a note, typical of her mischievous machinations, written as if to a loan shark with a plea not to “hurt my family.”
Sisterhood had not always been so agreeable to me. I could never identify precisely when it happened, but somewhere along the line, my eight younger siblings had—mercifully—ceased devoting their every waking hour to fighting and fits. I had always felt protective of these adorable nuisances, but now they had grown into clever and creative human beings whose minds I’d want to know even in the absence of our genetic connection. I’d spent my early years seizing upon every opportunity to spend time away from them, desperate to be free of responsibility for them and to be a Big Kid. Now we sought each other out whenever we had free time. We’d walk to the bakery for cake pops and frosting shots while Noah pontificated on Captain Underpants and The Hunger Games. We made time for family movie night most weekends, parsing scenes from films like Inception and Never Let Me Go for weeks afterward. On more than one occasion, I reached my arms out to my sides to stretch only to have Luke mistake it as an invitation for a hug. The nine of us were easily a self-sufficient picketing team, a formidable crew of laborers, people who could work together mostly drama-free to get things done, with good-natured teasing and banter all along the way.
Sunday afternoons would see us hiking together with our parents along the trails by the Kansas Governor’s Mansion, chatting and laughing and tripping over each other in the waning sun, throwing ourselves onto the train tracks and feigning looks of abject terror for an impromptu photo shoot. Our parents would hold hands, contentedly watching over the whole brood of us and laughing at our shenanigans. The lessons that brought us to this place hadn’t come easily, but they were among my most treasured. Being part of a family this size—especially with our imaginative and ever-attentive parents at the helm—had helped to teach us humility and patience. We had each come into the world with a strong personality and an outsize sense of justice, but as we grew, we learned to pick our battles, not to throw down at the slightest provocation. We learned to yield to each other. But the wisdom that is from above is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, and easy to be intreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without partiality, and without hypocrisy.
In the months that followed the installation of the self-appointed elders, I dedicated myself to employing these lessons in the face of escalating confusion and frustration. The elders issued new edicts on an ad hoc basis, and always via direct, in-person communication; gone were the days of church-wide emails and meetings where important matters were hashed out for all members to hear and weigh in on. Instead, members would learn of decisions from an assigned elder: one’s husband, if married, or father, if not. For the few members who had neither husband nor father as a church elder, an elder was appointed to disseminate information to them. Questions and concerns, once freely discussed with all other church members, were now confined to our assigned elder or parents only. My brother Sam had been my friend and counselor for many years, but when I asked him about a new decision in the early stages of this process, he shut me down: “You need to talk to Dad about that. He’s the one you should be addressing such things with.” Joy, contentedness, submission—these were the only acceptable communications among the church body as a whole.
Not even Gramps was an appropriate audience for questions or doubts, as he was kept only minimally aware of all the maneuverings of the elders and the day-to-day happenings of the church. This had already been a trend for some time. My grandfather was getting older, and my family had taken an example from the book of Exodus, when Jethro, the father-in-law of Moses, saw that the job of leading the Israelites had become too much for Moses to do alone. Thou wilt surely wear away, both thou, and this people that is with thee: for this thing is too heavy for thee; thou art not able to perform it thyself alone. Jethro proposed that a system of lesser judges be instituted beneath Moses, and it shall be, that every great matter they shall bring unto thee, but every small matter they shall judge: so shall it be easier for thyself, and they shall bear the burden with thee. The new elders seemed to see themselves in this manner, relieving my grandfather of the burden of leading the church. To go over their heads and seek aid or comfort or understanding from our pastor directly—to call the elders’ judgment into question in any way—was not allowed. Even as the cruelty toward my mother continued and increased for months on end, and even though she and Gramps were close, she dared not be open with him about what was happening to her. If she had, her exclusion from the church would have been all but certain.
I struggled to conform to our new paradigm, and I struggled to understand and articulate why I was struggling. Theoretically, it was possible to implement a change like this in a biblical way. There were plenty of verses in the New Testament about elders, and I realized for the first time that at least some of them were referring to a specific office in the church—not just to “older people.” And when they had ordained them elders in every church, they commended them to the Lord. Let the elders that rule well be counted worthy of double honour. But unlike in that passage, we hadn’t ordained these elders; they had ordained themselves—a fact that would have been easier to accept if I hadn’t felt conflicted about nearly every decision they issued.
One of the first came just before the Royal Wedding, the marriage of Prince William to Kate Middleton. Per our usual practice, the church issued a news release and announced on Twitter that we would protest the affair: “Wedding vows mean nothing to these royal mutts!” We had no intention of actually traveling to London—not least because the United Kingdom had banned church members from entering the country—but even the announcement of a protest was enough to generate significant media coverage. We were engaging in what we called “virtual picketing”: protesting a faraway event in a local space, and reaching the target audience by publishing photos and messages on the Internet and through the media. There was nothing inherently dishonest about this tactic—injustice in one city often inspires public demonstrations in others—except, of course, that our intent was to deceive.
We had employed this strategy before, choosing words that were technically true, but designed to leave an impression that was not: that we were actually present outside the event. I’d thought this was funny when I was younger, viewing it as a prank or a trick, rather than a lie. The behavior seemed questionable to me now, but all doubt left my mind as soon as I saw my cousin Jael abandoning the “technically true” for outright lies: she was posting tweets about being on a plane to London. My heart sank when I received a group text from Steve instructing everyone with a Twitter profile to republish a post from an account he had just created: @UGNewsWire. The account purported to be an “Int’l News Service,” complete with a fake logo to make it appear as if it were a legitimate media outlet. Its posts read:

WBC members (of ‘God Hates Fags’ infamy) picket outside Westminster Abbey day before #RoyalWedding
Westboro Baptist protesters outside Westminster Abbey - singing songs & chanting ‘God Hates the UK’
The infamous Westboro Baptist Church is on the ground in the UK - protesting the Royal Wedding:

Each of the posts included an image of Westminster Abbey that had been digitally altered to include picketers with signs. I saw that Steve had sent them to the BBC, the Associated Press, USA Today, and other news organizations.
I was mortified. These lies were idiotic, not only violating the Scriptures but offering the hordes of people who hated us a legitimate reason to impugn the integrity of the church. It undermined our claim to being messengers of God, and it was the picture of a verse my mother quoted often: Give none occasion to the adversary to speak reproachfully. I had several thousand followers on Twitter, and though I angered them on a regular basis, I had a growing sense of community with the people I encountered there. I felt like I owed them the truth, and I didn’t want to be attacked for being dishonest. And on top of everything else, I didn’t want them to think I was the type of person who would tell ridiculous lies for the sake of publicity.
In a pique, Grace found me at my desk not long after Steve’s message came through: “Did you see Steve’s text?!”
“Yeah,” I sighed. “Yikes.” Grace and I talked it through and were in agreement that the whole situation was petty, wrong, and embarrassing. We also knew that we would hear from Steve if we didn’t retweet him, and that we couldn’t decline his order without support from our parents. If we refused to obey—even in the matter of a simple retweet—there would be trouble. I briefly considered pretending to have missed Steve’s message, but that also would’ve been a lie, and it wouldn’t have worked, anyway: I had at least a few thousand more Twitter followers than all other church members, and he would certainly check my account to see if I’d done his bidding.
As if on cue, a follow-up text from Steve popped up on my screen.
I went in search of my mother and asked if we had to follow Steve’s instruction, explaining the objection that Grace and I shared. This was just a week after my mother had sent her apology email to the church, and though she agreed with us, she had no standing to question or correct another church member on any matter—especially an elder—no matter how egregious. She contacted my father at work, and returned later to report that we just needed to do what Steve had directed.
I picked up my phone and tapped the “retweet” button feeling utterly disgusted with Steve, with myself, and with the state of the church. What was the matter with these elders? Our integrity, our fidelity to the Scriptures—these were our foundation and our only defense against the accusations that the world was forever hurling in our direction. Our signs were plastered with the wrath of God, but here we were, hypocritically ignoring one of the clearest declarations of God’s hatred in the Scriptures:

These six things doth the Lord hate: yea, seven are an abomination unto him: A proud look, a lying tongue, and hands that shed innocent blood, An heart that deviseth wicked imaginations, feet that be swift in running to mischief, A false witness that speaketh lies, and he that soweth discord among brethren.

Not just one but two of these seven abominations addressed lying. A lying tongue. A false witness that speaketh lies.
Just as I’d known they would, Twitter users quickly discovered the truth and began to call us out for the lies and manipulated photos. They quoted Bible verses to me, the same ones I had quoted to my mother. Ashamed and angry, I repeated the party line about “virtual picketing” and Steve’s ridiculous claim that the fake picket was never meant to be taken literally—that the photos were so poorly Photoshopped that no one could possibly have been taken in by them—but this, too, was demonstrably false. When someone on Twitter pointed out to @UGNewsWire that Westboro members were banned from the U.K., Steve had tweeted back, “it was reported that the ban was lifted, but authorities can’t confirm.” Of course he meant to deceive people, I thought, he just did a shitty job.
Lying on my bed that night, Grace wasn’t spinning her absurd tales, and I wasn’t twisting her hair into French braids the way I’d done since she was a little girl. It felt foolish to be worked up over something as small as a retweet. Was our father right when he accused us of carping and self-righteousness? He had reminded us that we knew these people in the church, that they were kind and thoughtful and trying to do right by the Lord. They were working hard to preach to this God-forsaken world, and the two of us were sitting on the sidelines looking down our noses and sniping at them. What was our problem?
Grace and I stared at the ceiling for a time, talking quietly until we came to the answer:
For the first time, we had been told to do something unscriptural by someone in a position of authority.
For the first time, we had no way to make our objections heard by the church.
And as always, we had no choice but to submit.

By July, three months after the initial disciplinary email, visible signs of the elders’ influence were multiplying. A new, stricter modesty standard for women and girls had come first, implemented within days of the elder takeover. Before that, the general rule had been to cover the “4 B’s”—“breasts, back, butt, and belly,” my mother recited—but its enforcement had never been draconian. Now, showing any hint of skin in these areas—as, when reaching into the truck bed to grab a picket sign, a girl’s shirt rose and briefly exposed an inch of her stomach—was cause for censure. Legs, too, had become a problem. My parents sent my sisters and me to the mall in search of longer shorts, and we found several pairs that reached below mid-thigh. Our father approved, but he had been given to understand that his judgment was suspect. The process became even more demeaning when he sent me down to model the new shorts for my eldest brother. I was twenty-five. Sam was thirty-two. He did not approve. Modesty required high-necked blouses, dresses or pants that covered our legs down to our knees, and covered feet—no sandals—during the Sunday church service.
My mother’s disappearance from the media was another outward indication of the shift. She had represented the church in newspapers and radio interviews the world over on an almost-daily basis, but now Steve had taken charge. I was humiliated on her behalf as I watched her awkwardly turn away from a swarm of media that had surrounded us at a protest in Ohio. They were clamoring for interviews, baffled and trying to understand our message—but preaching the Gospel was clearly less important to the elders than bringing my mother to heel. Because she had been stripped of most of her other church-related duties, as well, the Phelps-Roper home grew eerily quiet as the constant flow of reporters, cousins, and other church members ebbed to a trickle.
As sudden and jarring as these changes were, there is an image that stands out in my memory as most clearly signaling the distress of this transition period: a close-up of my littlest sister’s fingers. Grace and I paid close attention to the elders’ decisions, and the more we saw, the more troubled we became. I was practiced at justifying Westboro’s doctrines, but the cracks forming in our fortress of logic and Scripture were becoming ever more difficult to ignore. Why would we be punished for unintentionally flashing an inch of skin on our back or belly, while our brothers were permitted to swim shirtless, with all of theirs on full display? Why were girls in other Westboro families subject to more lenient rules of modesty? How could the standards of God differ from house to house? Let us walk by the same rule, let us mind the same thing. Sam dismissed our objections, seeming to believe that they originated from a desire to dress like sluts. Grace and I knew better. That the problem went far deeper: hypocrisy, and the dawning realization that the rules we had been taught—the divine rules of a sovereign God—were being systematically replaced by the caprices of fallible men. Church members had always denied that we were “interpreting” the Bible, insisting that we were only reading and obeying what was plainly written in the Scriptures. But once I was excluded from the discussions, it soon became obvious that interpretation was inescapable—that it was happening daily, hourly, and always in ways that protected and expanded the authority of these eight elders.
Holding signs together at the pickets, sitting at our desks at home, lying side by side on my bed, Grace and I floundered, trying to make sense of it all and coming up empty. And all the while, she picked. The bits of skin around her fingernails were tiny at first, but she picked at them for weeks, tearing them off again and again until all of her fingers were scabbed and bleeding. “How did it go today?” Grace would ask in resignation when she returned home from school. I’d describe watching our mother stare unmoving at her ringing cell phone again, and then she’d answer it quietly, disappearing to the far corners of our empty house to have another conversation with my dad. Always more trouble, though she was trying to keep it from me. I’d tiptoe after her to eavesdrop on her side of the conversation—a habit I’d picked up from Sam growing up—to learn the source of the conflict. My mother was defensive, disbelieving the complaints my father was receiving: an aunt who disapproved of my mother’s tone, another vaguely unsatisfied that her mannerisms demonstrated sufficient repentance. It was as if they were actively looking for reasons to be offended. Despair was creeping toward the deepest parts of me, but I fought to keep it at bay and to comfort my sister. As I relayed the day’s events to Grace, she would pick. Pick. Pick. My reassurances about the necessity of submission—our own and our mother’s—began to sound hollow even to my own ears, and I could never say enough without resorting to lies. Instead, I bought her a box of hot-pink Hello Kitty Band-Aids and covered the tips of all ten of her mangled fingers.
“The Megan Solution,” she called it. A tendency I’d developed without realizing it.
Cover it up, and it will go away.

As it turned out, 2011 was conducive to cover-ups.
June marked the beginning of the most ambitious construction project we had ever undertaken: an enormous house for my aunt and uncle and their seven children, to be built on a concrete foundation directly across the street from my front door. The entire frame of the house would go up in the first eleven days—“Push Week”—which were full of scorching sun and ninety-degree temperatures that had us all baking. Sweat and sunscreen soaked through our clothes, but the work site was alive with the high-pitched buzzing of table saws and the insistent instruction to “Measure twice, cut once!” from the men who’d taken vacation days from work to lead the project. By the time we installed the roof trusses, we were sunburned down to the last minion and an accident with a framing nailer had sent a cousin to the emergency room—but the frame was up. Push Week was a success.
Amazingly, there were several unfamiliar faces around the construction site, too. In an unprecedented turn of events, new members were joining the church at an astonishing rate. Ten years had passed since Steve and his family had joined Westboro—the only outsiders who had come to stay in the quarter-century I’d been alive—but in the span of just a few months, a flood of new people arrived. A twenty-something man from the U.K. Another from a suburb of Chicago. A young woman my age, along with her three children. And an older couple from rural Kansas who had divorced before joining Westboro. It was the second marriage for both husband and wife, and—as our sign paraphrased Jesus—DIVORCE + REMARRIAGE = ADULTERY. Whosoever putteth away his wife, and marrieth another, committeth adultery: and whosoever marrieth her that is put away from her husband committeth adultery. It seemed impossible that anyone would make such a sacrifice—a happy marriage that had given them two sweet young boys—in order to join our church. After a lifetime of hostile rejection of our beliefs, we took this sudden profusion of converts as a clear sign that the Lord was with us, and that the end of all things was at hand. The fruit of the righteous is a tree of life; and he that winneth souls is wise.
My work for the church also expanded during this period. Most of my mother’s tasks had been reassigned to other church members, and several of them had fallen to me. In addition to coordinating the creation and publication of our news releases, I was now the keeper of Westboro’s picket schedules, both local and national. If I had questions, I was to report to my father or Steve, rather than to my mother—still sitting at her desk five feet from mine. It was a relief to have a degree of freedom from her intense overmanagement, but I could never feel good about it. I had been taught all my days to honor and obey my mother. I felt a growing sense of disgust at her shaming, and I wanted desperately not to contribute to it. Whenever I made or received a call about church matters that my mother had once overseen, I walked out of our office in haste. I would not cause her more pain with pointed reminders of the position she had lost.
Meanwhile, the unusual success I was finding on Twitter and in the media had caught the attention of the Kansas City Star. They sent a reporter to Topeka, and I spent many hours during that spring, summer, and fall giving interviews for a profile. The reporter shadowed me at work and at protests, and came to hear a sermon one Sunday. He even attended one of our summer birthday parties, watching me play volleyball and sit poolside with my cousins and nieces, happily fielding requests to tame their long hair with French braids. His questions were typical and without end, and I reflexively responded in the same way to the same pressure I had always felt when representing the church: to present a strong, united front. To show no weakness. To never admit—even to myself—that the church could be wrong. “There’s something wonderfully liberating in the notion that you’re one hundred percent right,” my grandfather often noted with calm and confidence. It was another conundrum—“mindfucks,” as Grace began to call them—that I wouldn’t see until much later: That we could experience such a deep sense of personal shame and humility, saying with the Apostle Paul that we were the chiefest of sinners, while simultaneously declaring that God had given us the most righteousness and insisting that the world obey our understanding. Our position was inherently arrogant and full of hubris, but we felt humble.
Between my conversations with the reporter, with all of the new Westboro converts, with outsiders on Twitter, and with C.G. on the back side of the Words With Friends game board, my growing doubts were crowded out by eternal justification. My attempts to convince them of our piety served to focus my attention on the aspects of the church that made life there so large and extraordinary. The camaraderie. The sense of family and belonging. The wonderful and smart and kind and generous and supportive church members. And the incredible feeling of being in a large group of people functioning almost seamlessly, as one, doing meaningful work as the earthly representatives of the Creator of all mankind. We weren’t just holding signs on street corners. We were preaching the standards of God, “maintaining and defending pure Gospel truth,” as Gramps always said from the pulpit. The Wars of the Lord.
“I’m here because I want to be here,” I told the Star reporter. “Because I believe these things. Because I love these words.”
My regular conversations with C.G. had ended two months earlier, but he sent me a message the day that the profile was published.
“She has no real friends,” the article read. “Few acquaintances. The majority of her outside interactions comes with the people—journalists, mostly—who stop by to profile the family.”
With characteristic brevity, C.G.’s response was a link to a video clip on YouTube. The farewell scene of Dances with Wolves. Sitting horseback atop a snowy cliff is a Native American called Wind In His Hair. He had initially been hostile to the man leaving the tribe via a trail far below the cliff—a white soldier who became known as Dances With Wolves—but now yells out to him in the Lakota language: “Dances With Wolves! I am Wind In His Hair. Do you see that I am your friend? Can you see that you will always be my friend?” Shouting it from the mountaintop, as it were.
My heart soared, and it made me ashamed. I stifled the feeling as soon as I could, steeling myself with the words that concluded the profile:
“I’m all in.”

In C.G.’s absence, I threw myself back into the work of the church and found an even greater sense of my place within the body. By visceral instinct more than conscious deliberation, I understood that no force silences doubt as effectively as zeal—a passionate clinging to familiar and reliable truths that quiets dissonance and snuffs out uncertainty in an avalanche of action. I was eager to be useful to fellow church members in every way that I could, and my obedience was rewarded with a deluge of tenderness from my loved ones. My twenty-sixth birthday arrived in January with a “text bomb”—the coordinated arrival of dozens of messages from church members, all popping up on my screen at once. My mother had implemented the practice for Westboro birthdays a few years earlier, but the outpouring of love was overwhelming this time.
The message from my dear friend and cousin Jael began: “Dear MegHeart, I have never known a better friend than you.”
From my beloved Gran: “Dear little Meg, you have always been a sweet, precious child; & for many years, a faithful & loving servant to our Lord! Gramps & I love you very much! Happy Birthday! You are GREATLY blessed!” She was eighty-six, but had learned to use emojis on her iPhone, her message sprinkled with happy faces and flowers and musical notes.
My mother wrote the story of my life in a series of tweets, which I copied into a Field Notes, fixing her typos as I always did:

Twenty-six years ago, God loaned us a baby girl. She’s comforted us always. We had great hopes for her and called upon the Lord for wisdom to teach her.
Her dad and I had only ONE hope for her: That she would have a tender heart from God, toward Him and His word, and that she would serve His people!
God moved us to sanctify her in her comings and goings, and to teach her line upon line and precept upon precept all of His counsel and ways.
Our little @MeganPhelps has evidence of grace from God and loving kindness, showing a work of God upon her heart, causing obedience to God.
One more tweet on the early days of @MeganPhelps on her God-appointed path: The HUGE happy personality is still with us!

And Grace:

26 years ago, @MeganPhelps was born. I am above all blessed to have her as my sister, friend, counselor, teacher, +, +, +.
Boaz said to Ruth, “… for all the city of my people doth know that thou art a virtuous woman…” The same can be said of @MeganPhelps.

Accompanying Grace’s tweet was a birthday gift on the same theme: a painting based on an album cover I loved, from a band called “Sons of an Illustrious Father.” Grace had replaced the name of the band with a new one: “Daughters of a Virtuous Mother,” in the radiant colors of sunset. It was beautiful, but I sensed in this gift a small act of defiance, too: unqualified praise of our mother, who was still an object of scrutiny and judgment by church members. Though I felt confident in condemning the whole world, the pronouncements of the church were sacrosanct and I had always been terrified of contradicting them in any way. For rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and stubbornness is as iniquity and idolatry. But in that moment, my sister’s subversion lit me from within. She was defending our mother.
And she was not afraid.

As the months ticked by, my vague hope that life would eventually return to some sense of normalcy began to dissolve. The shaming of my mother continued into the spring and summer of 2012, more than a year after it had begun. The church was caught in another incident of lies and Photoshop, and it became an international news story that we had pretended to protest Whitney Houston’s funeral. After this fiasco, and at the risk of getting ourselves into more trouble with our father, Grace and I were finally able to convince him to represent our concern to the rest of the elders. They agreed to end the public lies and manipulated photos, but only because they were deadlocked about the issue: four of them were against it, but four had no qualms. I was relieved that they had decided against continuing the practice, but I simply could not fathom that half of the elders saw nothing wrong with it.
Somehow, the situation deteriorated further still. A cousin of mine, then a woman in her early thirties, admitted to committing fornication and other sins, and she was ostracized and isolated by the church for months. The elders deemed her unrepentant. Just before the church-wide meeting that was to be her final warning from the congregation, I spoke with my brother Sam. I explained to him that I hadn’t been allowed to speak with our cousin for nearly half a year, and that I had no way of knowing the state of her heart and mind. She and I were both members of the church, and didn’t I have a duty to love one another with a pure heart fervently? But on the elders’ command, I hadn’t even spoken to her. I told Sam that I needed to actually interact with her to know how she was.
“You mean, ‘trust, but verify’?” Sam scoffed. He shook his head dismissively. “Nah.” He made it clear that I just had to take the elders’ word for it and accept their judgment that she was unrepentant. This was the clearest repudiation yet of the unanimity called for in Scripture. I was stunned.
We walked across the backyard in the cool air of late April—almost a year exactly after that email to my parents—and joined the meeting in the church sanctuary. My cousin pleaded sorrow and repentance for her misdeeds, and I heard true shame and sincerity in her voice. The elders were unmoved. The meeting quickly became a campaign to exclude her that very night, in spite of the fact that three church members spoke up in her defense. I was grateful when one elder voiced the same objection that I had: that my cousin had not been given the biblically required third and final warning from the church body—her last opportunity to demonstrate repentance.
All of her defenders were overruled.
“You need to be instructed in this matter,” one of my uncles said with stomach-turning condescension.
After thirty-odd years at Westboro, my cousin was kicked out of the church, her home, her family, and her life—all in violation of the very Scriptures we claimed to champion.
My sisters’ responses to these events reflected the internal struggle I was experiencing. For many years, my perspective had been much aligned with Bekah’s. We both felt a deep sense of inferiority when it came to matters of Scripture, and we were willing to yield to the judgment of older church members—even in cases where we at first felt discomfort or disagreement. The church had taught us to distrust our own judgment from the time we were children, and we had taken the verses to heart. The heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked: who can know it? When I spoke with Bekah about the doubts I was having, she responded in the same way that I always had: to see herself as insufficiently spiritual to question the wisdom of the elders. “We must be missing something,” she would say. “The elders must know something we don’t.” She trusted them, but little by little, my trust was eroding and withering. I wanted to believe Bekah, but for the first time in my life, I couldn’t shut off the questions running through my mind. I couldn’t identify the source of my new willingness to challenge the church, but I wanted it to go away. I wanted the simplicity of my old position—“trust and obey”—but it was proving elusive no matter how many times Bekah inspired me to reach for it.
Grace was another matter entirely. She had always had a unique role in the Phelps-Roper family, and I’d watched her grow into it with joy. As the seventh child of eleven, Grace tended to have fewer of the more mundane household responsibilities, because those generally fell to the older ones of us. Instead she had more free time and fun projects: arranging creative portrait sessions for other families in the church, painting street addresses onto the curb outside each Westboro home, and entertaining our little brothers. She was full of mischief and dubbed the “Pied Piper” by our mother, because the four youngest boys would follow her anywhere—including into the girls’ bathroom on one memorable occasion. Whereas Bekah and I were regarded as submissive and obedient, Grace’s free spirit and apparent lack of discipline earned her a reputation in the church as willful and coddled. It was a branding I considered undeserved: though it appeared that Grace’s daily tasks were more distraction than discipline, she was doing all that our parents required of her.
I felt motherly toward all my youngest siblings, each of whom I had read to and sung to and rocked to sleep when they were small, but Grace would always be special to me. She was the youngest of us three sisters in a family full of boys, and her name suited her well: she was graceful both in features and manner. My sister’s beauty and charm could be almost unnerving at times, though we never spoke of such things in our home. Any discussion of beauty was limited to an oft-quoted admonition about its emptiness. Favour is deceitful, and beauty is vain: but a woman that feareth the Lord, she shall be praised.
It was hard for me to hear the way our aunts and uncles impugned Grace’s obedience, and I became her champion of sorts, subtly pushing back against their disparaging words. I wouldn’t realize until much later that the protectiveness I felt for Grace wasn’t just because she was following the rules. It was because she was managing to do so without losing herself. I adored Grace’s creativity and free spirit and the dreams she would so casually mention—of traveling to Paris or Rome to see the sculptures she was studying in art history, or off to Russia, home of Pushkin and Tolstoy. I loved her dreams even though I knew them to be impossible. We could never leave the United States and the broad protection of the First Amendment, and the church’s ban on international travel was just one of the innumerable limitations on our lives that I had long ago assimilated. But because “Grace flies under the radar,” as my parents often noted, she was somewhat insulated from our mother’s watchful gaze and need for submission. She hadn’t yet been broken. She’d made it to age nineteen with her will intact, and she was the only person with whom I could speak openly about my concerns—the only one willing to express disagreement with the elders’ positions without including the standard caveat: “The elders know better. We must be missing something.”
Neither of us was prepared when Grace became their next target.

“Megan!”
Grace urgently called me to her room early one morning in late May, and I found her on her bed looking panic-stricken and ready to vomit. She was hysterical, telling me she had just received a call from the wife of one of the new Westboro converts. Justin and Lindsey [names changed] were about my age. We saw their conversion as a testimony to the power and sovereignty of God: He had turned their hearts to His truth.
The couple and their baby boy had rented a house from my parents located just a few doors down from ours, and Bekah, Grace, and I visited often. We liked them immediately and were in awe of their lives and talents. In contrast to the lives we had led at the church—structured, protected, controlled—theirs had been full of exotic places and experiences. Their transition in forsaking that worldly life to stand with us on the picket line was mind-blowing to my sisters and me, and we wanted to understand their conversion in every minute detail. In Lindsey we recognized the same creative energy that animated Grace, and the two bonded over their mutual love of style and art. Lindsey’s repertoire of skills was broader than my sister’s, and they made plans for Grace to take lessons from her—drawing, painting, sewing. We would have dinner together, watch movies at their house, and stand together on the picket line in Topeka, Grace and I quizzing them endlessly about their life before Westboro.
The alacrity with which we took to this new family was remarkable, but not unusual. I wasn’t aware of the pattern at the time, but Grace and I often bonded with outsiders in this way. We harbored a deep curiosity about the world outside, and we indulged it as much as the constraints of our lives would allow. She and I would sit on the floor of my room or hers and read books and stories aloud to each other for hours, not just the Bible but everything from Anna Karenina to the fairy tales of Hans Christian Andersen. When it was Grace’s turn to read, I’d pull my hands through her long, dark waves to detangle and braid them, or massage her scalp in slow, methodical motions, or paint her nails in one of the colors approved by our father—light pink, nude, or clear—while we contemplated the curious lives and ideas of these characters. Whenever journalists and filmmakers came around for interviews, Grace and I would ask almost as many questions about their lives as they asked about ours, and we grew attached if they spent more than a few hours with us. On the day that Louis Theroux and the BBC crew departed after three weeks of filming, we exchanged gifts—including baby clothes and blankets for the sound engineer, soon to be a father—and then I retreated into my house to cry in my bedroom. The four of them had been so kind to us. I believed their choices would lead them to Hell, but I cared about them. I didn’t want to say goodbye forever, and it frightened me that I regarded them with such affection. Love not the world, neither the things that are in the world. If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him.
But now with Justin and Lindsey, we didn’t have to say goodbye. They had had as many fascinating experiences as the journalists we encountered, but here there were no limits or constraints. We didn’t have to keep them at arm’s length, because we were allowed to cultivate friendship with them. They were part of our community. They were safe.
All of that ended on the morning of the phone call. Lindsey had discovered that Grace and Justin had been texting extensively and was convinced that my little sister had designs on her husband. The two had class together at the university and had grown closer over the course of the semester, conversing often about everything and nothing. I’d had no idea how frequently they’d been texting, but when I listened to Grace describe the messages, I instantly thought of C.G.: The discussions never touched on “inappropriate” topics, but the closeness itself felt improper to me. The fear on my sister’s face twisted my insides, especially since I knew what was coming. I wanted to defend Grace to our parents and to the elders—“She didn’t know what she was doing!”—but an angry call from a jealous wife was a scandal that couldn’t be smoothed over by a plea of ignorance, no matter how genuine. It wouldn’t matter to the elders that Grace had seen no distinction between a friendship with an unrelated man and a friendship with one of our cousins. Why would she? We had been told all our lives that church members were our family, and that’s how we had always seen them—related or not. For whosoever shall do the will of my Father which is in heaven, the same is my brother, and sister, and mother. The same verse that justified cutting our brother Josh out of our family was the one that instructed us to bring these strangers into it. And more, the fact that Justin was married gave Grace an even greater sense of safety in their closeness. It was unthinkable that anything improper could happen with him, because he was married. The line was so bright and crossing it was so far outside the realm of possibility that she simply didn’t believe it could be improper.
Punishment was swift. Grace was forbidden from having any contact at all with either Justin or Lindsey, not even to apologize. Instead of chasing after children as she did every summer, Grace would be required to take a temp job at the Kansas Department of Revenue, sitting at a desk doing data entry work for eight hours each day. My siblings and I would no longer be permitted to spend time with Justin and Lindsey, but instead would avoid them—except that we could say hello if we happened to pass them at church on Sundays. Because Lindsey had not asked to be baptized since she’d arrived six months earlier, the elders decided that it was time to isolate her from the rest of the church. She was a negative influence. “What makes her any different than the rest of these heathen, except that she’s related to a member of the church? That doesn’t confer any special benefits to her.”
New restrictions kept coming, growing increasingly draconian all the time. Sam and Steve had never approved of Grace’s freewheeling spirit, and they encouraged my father to rein her in. It seemed to anger both men that Grace had opinions and that she was willing to ignore their advice—even when the smallest issues were implicated. Two years earlier, Grace and I had decided to switch to Apple computers. Steve advised against it, and I yielded to his recommendation immediately and without complaint. Grace, on the other hand, thanked him for his input and explained that she would be getting a Mac. Steve pestered my parents for weeks afterward, strenuously arguing that his reasons for remaining with the status quo were worth following. It had seemed embarrassing at the time, because it was clear that Steve only cared about the issue because he wanted to be obeyed. My mother eventually came up with an excuse for why it had to be a Mac (“It will help Isaiah learn another operating system for his job!”), and though I didn’t care about the computer either way, I was glad that my parents had pushed back against Steve’s bullying.
But my father couldn’t really do that anymore. His judgment had been so severely called into question by the church that he had seemed unwilling to trust himself—or my mother—ever since. Instead he listened and followed the recommendations of his fellow elders, even when they were contrary to his instincts. Most of these new rules had no specific foundation in Scripture—just a reference to a broad passage calling believers to abstain from all appearance of evil. When Sam and Steve learned that Grace was using her required twenty-minute work break to explore the area around her downtown office building, they prompted my father to forbid it. He did. The appearance of evil. She began spending those breaks sitting on the couch in the twelfth-floor bathroom. When Grace asked to take our brothers to a park to climb trees, our father forbade that, too—not just on that day, but ever. That Grace would request such a silly thing was taken as evidence that her heart wasn’t in the right place. The appearance of evil. When our father instructed Grace to choose a degree other than art, Sam and Steve advised him that he hadn’t gone far enough—that her options should be limited to the study of nursing or computers only. The fact that both of those studies were anathema to my sister was almost the point. In the words and actions of these men I could not help but see that, above all else, their desire was to break her spirit. Any comfort she found in her old ways—exploring and adventuring, even within the extreme confines of our sheltered lives—had to be taken from her. It was as if that phone call from Lindsey had given them an excuse to impose upon Grace every unreasonable limit they could dream up in order to quench her spirit. It was as if they were saying, “You see what happens when you let a young woman have her way?”
Still, I understood that Grace wasn’t perfect, and that my father was trying to help her to grow—to learn to discipline herself and her mind, and to see that necessary courses of action aren’t always fun or enjoyable. Sometimes, you just had to do what you were told. Bekah and I had learned these lessons when we were young, and our lives had become much more pleasant as a result. In learning to conquer our wayward emotions, we had found peace, and I tried to encourage Grace to seek it, as well. As much as I disagreed with so many of the elders’ decisions, I still believed that submitting to God meant submitting to church leaders, and I sent her quotes about the importance of training our hearts and minds to yield to them. Just by virtue of their authority over us, I fell back into the position that they were right, that our doubts were wrong, and that any disagreements we had were the rebellious impulses of disobedient children. How dare we think that we knew better than the leaders God had set over us? I wanted to yield, and I chided myself for any thought that contradicted the church.

“I just don’t understand this, Mom!” She and I were in the kitchen getting things ready for dinner. A month had passed since Lindsey’s call to my sister, and Grace and I hadn’t exchanged a word with her since. I had asked repeatedly for permission to apologize, to explain that our sudden disappearance hadn’t been a choice to punish Lindsey for the understandable outrage she’d unleashed on my sister, but because the elders had decided it was best. With increasing anger at my persistence, my father refused. Echoing the other elders, he insisted that Lindsey deserved neither explanation nor apology: she was no concern of ours except inasmuch as she had an interest in the Bible and our doctrines. “We’ve put Lindsey in an impossible situation!” I told my mother. “We’ve almost completely cut off her interactions with church members because she isn’t baptized—but we’ve also told Justin that if he’s ruling well his own house, he’ll be keeping Lindsey from having relationships with friends or family outside the church, too! She’s just supposed to stay at home all the time and only have her husband and toddler around? Steve would never have accepted that kind of treatment if we’d done it to his wife when he first came here!”
My mother was quiet. I could feel myself spinning out of control, despair and bile rising in my chest, but I couldn’t stop myself from continuing. “What are we doing? There is nothing Scriptural about what’s going on here! The elders act as if their judgment is infallible and they refuse to listen to anyone else—even when they’re directly violating the commandments! All the verses about being of one mind mean nothing to them! The women are angry and spiteful and always finding reasons to be offended!” I was crying now, filled with a desperation so choking I could hardly breathe. I quoted the verses I knew my mother already knew. She’d turned to them often over the past year, trying to maintain hope that her situation would improve. My heart twisted into a knot of despair knowing that the past year had been so much worse for her. I was only a witness to the cruel treatment of the elders and other members. She was their primary target. By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to another. In lowliness of mind let each esteem other better than themselves. Put on therefore, as the elect of God, holy and beloved, bowels of mercies, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, longsuffering; Forbearing one another, and forgiving one another.
Mercy. Humility. Meekness. Compassion. Where were they among this church body?
Almost as soon as the thought formed in my mind, another took its place:
I sounded like C.G.

The Fourth of July arrived. We’d stopped celebrating American Independence after the September 11 attacks—dispositive evidence that our nation was fully and finally doomed—but we still got the day off from work. Grace and I had volunteered to spend some of ours painting the basement walls in the home of our friend Jayme, a new church member, so we changed into old clothes after the noontime pickets. We headed out into the afternoon heat, across the street, down the path of stone steps that led through the shade of my aunt’s front yard and then my brother’s, and into the dark house that sat three doors west of ours. The basement’s dim lighting felt especially depressing after the blinding sun outside. We lined the floor by the walls with garbage bags, and I poured white paint into an empty cottage cheese carton that Grace held out to me. Neither of us spoke. I connected a portable speaker to my phone—the new album by Blind Pilot, another of C.G.’s recommendations—and pressed play.
Grace had misjudged again, and she’d received an ultimatum from the elders: one more wrong move and she would be excluded from the church. This time, my sister’s crime had been failing to turn Justin in for reaching out to her. He’d used Twitter to send her a private message asking how to fix the situation his family was in. Justin and Lindsey seemed baffled by and resentful of the isolation that the church had imposed upon them—an obvious and entirely reasonable response, as I’d argued to my mother just days before. Instead of reporting Justin’s message to the elders, Grace had sent a brief response explaining that she couldn’t talk to them, and to please just talk with our parents. He’d followed up with an email, and Grace had called him to repeat the same message: Talk to my parents.
After a couple of guilt-filled days, she’d turned herself in.
The elders considered Grace’s actions depraved enough to warrant abridging the biblically mandated disciplinary process, jumping directly to the final step before exclusion. And just as with our cousin, they’d made the decision without even meeting with the rest of the church. I knew that Grace should have reported Justin without hesitation, the way the rest of us had learned to do—for they watch for your soul—but in answering her mistake with more clear violations of Scripture, the elders continued to abuse the authority of their office. I had no idea if anyone else felt the same, because addressing grievances with other members—instead of one’s elder—was not permitted.
I stared intently at the basement wall as I moved the brush over the deep purple stripes we were meant to cover. I watched the bristles leave their trails of white, but no matter how thickly I coated the brush or how many times I went over it—again and again and again—the darkness was still visible underneath. My mind spun through its familiar circuits, the same objections and doubts that had been brewing for over a year, grasping for something that would return order to the chaos. The futility of it all had been a heaviness in my mind for months, but it had taken on a physical dimension now, and it was suffocating—the dank chill of the basement and the shadows cast in the dim light and the impossible melancholy of the notes seeping out of the stereo. The weight of my arm and of the paintbrush seemed to grow with each stroke until I could hardly bring myself to lift them. An insurmountable burden.
I had never seen a member of my immediate family subjected to church discipline before, but it wasn’t special family ties that made the situation untenable. It was the fact that for the first time in my life, the accused were people I lived with and knew most intimately. I had direct, firsthand knowledge of their daily lives and habits, and I knew that the judgments leveled by the elders were wrong. They were wrong about my mother. They were wrong about my sister. And I strongly suspected they’d been wrong about my cousin, too. I could not acquiesce to their conclusions the way I’d done with so many others before. I could no longer blindly trust the judgment of these men.
My arm continued to drag the paintbrush up and down, but my pulse and thoughts were racing. By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to another. I couldn’t believe how our love within the church had been warped beyond recognition by the elders’ unscriptural will to punish. By their implacable demands for unquestioning obedience. By their pernicious need for superiority and control. They had developed a toxic sense of certainty in their own righteousness, seizing for themselves the role of the ultimate arbiter of divine truth—and they now seemed willing to lay waste to anyone who disagreed with them. It was a heinous arrogance and sinfulness that could not be denied.
And in a moment of horrifying clarity, I finally saw what had eluded me for so long:
We had all been behaving in the exact same way toward outsiders.
It was as if we were finally doing to ourselves what we had been doing to others—for over twenty years.
My eyes widened and my face flushed hot, overtaken by panic and shame and regret and humiliation in the split second it took my mind to find a way to make sense of the chaos that the church had become:
What if we’re wrong? What if this isn’t The Place led by God Himself? What if we’re just people?
And I felt sure that it was all true.
I crossed a chasm in that split second, pursuing a thought my mind had never truly imagined and now could never take back. With stark clarity I understood that whether the church was wrong or right, I was a monster. If we were wrong, then I had spent every day of my life industriously sowing doom, discord, and rage to so many—not at the behest of God, but of my grandfather. I had wasted my life only to fill others’ with pain and misery. And if the church was right? Then asking those questions and even beginning to consider their implications was an unforgivable betrayal of everyone I had ever loved and the ideals I’d dedicated my life to defending. In my mind, I was a betrayer already. I thought of my mother, and the guilt was crippling. I didn’t deserve to be part of this body of believers. The Lord was done with me—an Esau, after all. Already condemned. Overwhelmed by a sudden pressing need to leave that instant, every part of my body hummed with a single vicious accusation: You don’t belong.
My eyes squeezed shut, my whole face twisting instantly into desperate sobs that I tried to suffocate by cutting off the air to my lungs. In the span of a few seconds, my world had disintegrated, slipping through my fingers like so much sand. I turned to put the paintbrush down and go home to pack—there was nothing beyond packing—but I stopped short at the sight of my sister. Her back was to me as she worked the paint, shoulders hunched and limbs moving as if through quicksand—a visible reminder that she had been trudging through the same quagmire of depression, confusion, and despair that I had.
How could I leave without explaining to her?
How could I ever explain this to her?
Still sobbing, I turned back to the wall, and dipped my brush in the paint again. I was dizzy. Needed to calm down. Needed to think this through. My mind reached for solid ground, a way to explain to myself and my sister why I was suddenly doubting the church itself—the only truth we’d ever known. What did I know for sure?
The lying and Photoshopping were clearly wrong. Lying lips are abomination to the Lord: but they that deal truly are his delight.
The prolonged isolation and lack of grace toward perceived offenders were clearly wrong. Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are spiritual, restore such an one in the spirit of meekness. Justin. Lindsey. Grace. My mother. My cousin. These situations were egregious, ongoing, and the list kept growing.
The endless proliferation of extra-biblical rules. Ye shall not add unto the word which I command you, neither shall ye diminish ought from it.
The exclusion of most church members from the decision-making process, and the inability to speak freely with non-elders. Now I beseech you, brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the same thing, and that there be no divisions among you; but that ye be perfectly joined together in the same mind and in the same judgment.
My heart hammered, full of terror at the seditious thoughts taking hold in my mind—would God snuff me out this very moment?—but I was growing bolder. I fought to stop myself from reverting to the mindset that had kept me from these questions all my life: certainty that the church was The Truth, and that I was a child, and that for me to challenge or contradict their established wisdom was nothing more than a tantrum.
I had to keep going.
I thought again of the arguments C.G. had made about our lack of compassion, gentleness, humility. How had I so easily dismissed him? How could I have missed what had been staring me in the face for over a year?
And most important: If the church was wrong about all those things, what else were we wrong about?
The question felt like an iron key sliding into the lock of a long-sealed door. I could almost hear it swinging open on hinges groaning with age, unleashing a surge of memories buried inside—as if they had been deliberately locked away so as to cause no disturbance. They flashed through my mind one after another:
• A pointed Twitter exchange with a Jewish blogger called David Abitbol: I was defending Westboro’s call for the government to designate homosexuality a capital crime, in accordance with Levitical law—DEATH PENALTY FOR FAGS. David was an Orthodox Jew, and surprised me by quoting Jesus: He that is without sin among you, let him first cast a stone at her. I had seen this as a general call to humility, and I couldn’t believe I had never connected that Jesus was specifically arguing against the death penalty. I was mortified. When I approached my mother, she doubled down. She repeated verses that seemed to support our position, but never answered what Jesus had said. Her stridency took me aback, and I walked away shaken. It was the first time I was consciously aware of inconsistency in our doctrine, but I was certain this sign was unscriptural. I had quietly stopped holding it—and put an end to my arguments with David—but this was a relatively small point of theology. I had set it aside, immediately and instinctively suppressing the memory.
• A conversation with my mother during a walk to an evening picket: Why did we have a sign declaring FAGS CAN’T REPENT? Couldn’t God give repentance to anyone He chose? Isn’t it misleading and dishonest to say otherwise? Again, she seemed not to hear me, repeating the verses we used to justify the sign, but not addressing the contradictory verses I had quoted. And again, I’d been afraid to pursue the objection—who did I think I was?—but I had stopped holding this sign, too.
• A Bible reading with my grandfather one summer afternoon: Gramps was making lunch in the church kitchen, and I’d walked in with some papers my mom had sent me across the block to deliver. “What’s that Matthew 5 say about divorce, love bug?” he asked me, pointing to the collection of super-large-print Bibles and concordances always stacked on the counter. I’d plucked one up and sat down and started to read to him, eventually coming to a perplexing phrase: pray for them which despitefully use you. We had been earnestly praying for the destruction of our enemies for years by then—but if that was right for us to do, what did this verse mean? My grandfather paused: “Well … it doesn’t say to pray for their good.” In the context of Jesus’s command to love your enemies, this argument made no sense. When I asked my father about it that evening and told him what Gramps had said, my father skeptically confirmed what I’d known was true: “That’s clearly not what that means. It does mean to pray for their good.” I was relieved to hear my father say so—but now that I’d resolved the immediate controversy in my thoughts, the contradiction flitted out of my mind like a butterfly, never to return again. Why had I never pursued it?
And with that, the most powerful partition in my mind—the one that had kept me from seeing the most grievous contradiction of all—dissolved.
We had been claiming to love thy neighbor all my life. We claimed we were the only ones who truly cared about anyone else. “We’re the only ones that love these fags!” Gramps would say in his Mississippi drawl.
But at the same time, we had been wholly dedicated to antagonizing the world. We mocked and delighted in their suffering. We demanded they repent, and then asked God to preserve them in their sin. We prayed for Him to destroy them.
Two diametrically opposed positions, held strongly and sincerely by the same mind at the same time—just never in the same moment.
A deceived heart hath turned him aside, that he cannot deliver his soul, nor say, Is there not a lie in my right hand?
I felt deranged.
I numbly moved the brush up and down the wall, hot tears still sliding down my cheeks. My mind was finally settling on its inevitable conclusion: There was something terribly wrong at Westboro. God was not in this place. We were not special. Not hand-selected by the Lord to do His divine work. We were a deluded people.
As my thoughts slowed, I came back to the present, the melody of a new song drifting into my awareness. It was gentle and somber and yearning, and it sounded like I would never be happy again.
Will I break and will I bow / if I cannot let it go?
At these lyrics, I began to sob in silence again. I glanced back to see if my sister had noticed, but she was still blissfully unaware of my state. Of the fact that we were living a delusion. Even knowing how difficult things had become at Westboro, how could I drag her with me into this waking nightmare?
“When will these things change?” Grace had asked me after the ultimatum. When would the grip of the elders slacken, their control over our every movement? When could she say a simple “Hello” to Justin without the suspicion and wrath of the church falling on her? When would our mother be treated with the compassion any church member deserved?
I’d told her what I always had: that the Lord was with us. That everything would doubtless improve. I composed long messages to encourage her to take heart and continue in Westboro’s way:

You must look on the great blessings you have been given, my sister. You must rejoice in those gifts and not continue to sorrow. You seemed to heartily agree with that recent line from Gramps’ sermon: “I think unthankfulness may be the most disgusting sin of all.” We don’t want to anger the Lord with unthankfulness—for gifts and for deliverance and for all we have.
Remember what the Lord said to Joshua. Israel had trespassed against God and He cursed them in battle and Joshua mourned and prayed to God. “And the Lord said unto Joshua, Get thee up: wherefore liest thou thus upon thy face?” Instead of mourning, we have to get after what the Lord has given us to do. “Be not weary in well doing,” dear girl, and “cast not away your confidence, which hath great recompense of reward.”
In due season we will reap, if we faint not.

But the hope that inspired me to write those messages was now gone. We couldn’t fix the problems in the church, because we no longer had a voice. When we objected, we weren’t viewed as church members with legitimate concerns. Instead, we were disobedient children. I thought about the future, and there was nothing left.

If I could’ve known then we were dying to get gone …
I can’t believe we get just one.

What if we did only have one life, and not eternity? How could we spend ours hurting people, picking fights with the entire world—not at the will of a Sovereign God, but for nothing?
How could I not talk to Grace?
I didn’t know what we would do with our lives instead, but I thought of my sister’s impossible dreams of exploring the world … and I suddenly realized that maybe the elders had been right about her. Maybe Grace didn’t belong here, either. Maybe she had already come to the same conclusion I just had, but was afraid to leave on her own. Maybe she was afraid to tell me, because I had been such a zealous defender of the church for so long. If so, her fear was not unfounded. Our mother had taught us the same verses:

If thy brother, or thy son, or thy daughter, or the wife of thy bosom, or thy friend, which is as thine own soul, entice thee secretly, saying, Let us go and serve other gods … Thou shalt not consent unto him, nor hearken unto him; neither shall thine eye pity him, neither shalt thou conceal him: But thou shalt surely kill him; thine hand shall be first upon him to put him to death.

Our church wouldn’t be executing anyone, but the standard was clear: if your closest friend or family member came to you suggesting defiance of Westboro’s God, that person deserved to die—and you were responsible for turning them in. Neither shalt thou conceal him.
But Grace hadn’t turned Justin in. Maybe she wouldn’t turn me in.
I needed to think before I spoke to Grace. Where would we go?
I forced myself to stop crying and let the logistical part of my brain kick in.
I immediately dismissed the idea of going to any ex-member of Westboro for help. We kept close tabs on the few who ever spoke up publicly about their time in the church, and it was clear that those people were awful. So many lies.
I thought a moment, and then went to pick up my phone. I switched the ringer to silent so that the telltale trill wouldn’t sound over the speaker as I re-installed Words With Friends.

Grace came home on her lunch break the following day, and as had become our habit, I followed her up the stairs, down the hall, and around to my room in the corner of the house. We hadn’t been eating much, and the heaviness of our silence had become habitual, too—particularly since the ultimatum. My sister had never been anywhere without permission, never been given any freedom or independence of any kind, and now she was on the cusp of being thrust into the world on her own at nineteen, with almost no practical life skills—for texting.
We sat side by side on the edge of my bed, staring at the wall in silence for a minute, and then I started to cry. I laid my head in her lap and sobbed for a few moments. She cradled my head and slowly dragged her fingers across my scalp, trying to comfort me.
“Grace…”
I tried to compose myself, but the longer I waited, the harder I wept. How was I even going to say this?
“… what if we weren’t here?”
I couldn’t bring myself to say What if we left? aloud. I couldn’t bring myself to make it real.
Her hand paused for a beat and then slowly continued its path through my curls.
“What do you mean?” she asked quietly.
What did I mean? My body was racked with sobs, and I tried to control them long enough to get the words out.
“What if we were somewhere else?” Slowly, slowly.
I don’t remember any words after that. Only an eruption of despair. I tried to explain what had happened the day before in the basement, my terrifying realizations about the church, but what came out was almost entirely incoherent. I couldn’t settle on any one idea long enough to articulate it, because I was overcome by a hysteria the likes of which I had never known. That familiar fear always just beneath the surface—the little voice accusing that in spite of everything, I really was a reprobate—had amplified a thousandfold. I knew logically that I couldn’t escape the wrath of an omnipresent God, but the sense of His imminent judgment had kindled a fire in me, a desperate urgency to get out. I wanted to jump out of my skin. There was no way to consider the magnitude of the devastation that I would soon be forever cut off from everyone I had ever loved: my faculties simply shut down before I could even approach that reality. I was betraying my beloved mother—treated unconscionably by the church body and then abandoned by her own daughter. How could I leave her? Monstrous.
And all the while, Grace held my head in her lap, running her nails through my hair, periodically asking questions in a low, cautious voice. Distrustful. Why now? What has changed? Where would we go?
I had no other ideas, so I mentioned C.G. Maybe he would help us.
I didn’t tell Grace that I’d spoken with him already, partly because both she and he were behaving as though they were afraid of me. As if they didn’t know me. Their reactions were crushing, because they confirmed what I already believed: that outside of Westboro, I was nothing. Within the church, I was a cherished daughter—I wielded no power, but my skills were many and useful and valued. I was dependable, and trustworthy, and called upon frequently. I had built my life and identity around the church, and I was well-beloved. Who was I on the outside? I was the perpetrator of untold amounts of harm in the world. I was a lover of tragedy, cruelly attacking the grieving at their most vulnerable. I was a willing participant in the most aggressive anti-gay picketing campaign the country had ever seen. What reason did anyone have to give me a second chance?
Grace and C.G. had seen some of the very best parts of me. If even they thought me unhinged, there was no hope for me on the outside.
No one would ever understand.
All was lost.




