






2. The Bounds of Our Habitation

Throughout my childhood, my mother was determined to make my siblings and me understand one idea above all: We were not in charge of our lives, but God—and that God ruled via the parents and elders He had set over us. Our duty was singular: to obey them. Children, obey your parents in all things: for this is well pleasing unto the Lord. Their power over us was absolute, and we would do well to accept that without question or protest. These were, as the New Testament put it, the bounds of our habitation. It was one of my mother’s favorite phrases.
In Westboro’s theology, obedience was about more than family life. My mother began trying to get this across to us as soon as we were old enough to understand words, and my earliest understanding of it came during a car ride we took together. I was settled in the backseat of our white Toyota Camry, with Bekah buckled into the seat next to me and our mother at the wheel. I think we were headed to or from the family law office, but some parts of the recollection are slippery—sometimes I look over and Bekah is in a car seat, sometimes not, sometimes it’s winter, sometimes spring—so I can’t be sure. What I do remember is that we were young enough to each have a Barbie doll in our laps, and that Mom was telling us about predestination.
My mother’s ardent love for the Scriptures manifested itself in many ways, but it was especially apparent in the joy she took in teaching the Bible for its own sake—not when one of us had disobeyed and needed correction, but while she read and expounded upon the stories to us, taking care to make sure we understood the complexities as well as we could at any given age, going a little deeper each time we returned to the same story. For precept must be upon precept, precept upon precept; line upon line, line upon line; here a little, and there a little. She was revealing to us the secret ways in which the world worked, and Bekah and I were full of questions. In the car that day, we were trying for the first time—but certainly not the last—to wrap our young minds around the idea that everything we did, every word, every deed, every blink of an eye, beat of the heart, twitch of a muscle—all had been caused by God, who worketh all things after the counsel of his own will. My first response to this assertion was to do what I assume many people do upon discovering predestination: to make a split-second decision and suddenly shift course in an attempt to prove the idea false. With all my strength, I squeezed my fists into tiny balls, fingernails biting into my palms, and then released. Had God seen that coming? My eyes widened as I realized that the doctrine of predestination was impossible to thwart; God controlled even those impulsive flailings, even the impulses themselves. (“Unfalsifiability” was not yet a term in my repertoire, and so presented no difficulty for me at the time.)
Mom continued on, telling the story of Jacob and Esau to illustrate predestination. It wasn’t the long version of their story from the Old Testament, of Jacob’s deceit in securing the blessing of the firstborn and of Esau’s vow of murderous revenge. Instead, our mother focused on the most salient part of their tale, found in the book of Romans: their fates. Jacob and Esau had been grandsons of the patriarch Abraham—twin grandsons, Mom stressed, as biologically similar as it was possible for two humans to be. “And yet! Before those two boys were even born, God loved Jacob and hated Esau. They hadn’t done anything good or bad to deserve it. They were still in their mother’s womb!” In the Bible, she told us, God is likened to a heavenly Potter, with humans as clay in His hands to mold as He pleases. Cannot I do with you as this potter? saith the Lord. Behold, as the clay is in the potter’s hand, so are ye in mine hand. God had elected—chosen—the beloved Jacob for honor, to be welcomed into Heaven for an eternity of bliss. His twin brother, Esau, meanwhile, had been created to be condemned to Hellfire—all through no fault or cause of his own. For the children being not yet born, neither having done any good or evil, that the purpose of God according to election might stand, not of works … As it is written, Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated.
But Jacob and Esau weren’t the only ones created with their fates predetermined, Mom continued. Indeed, these twins were the standing symbols of the two types of people living in the world: the elect, represented by Jacob, chosen by God for love, mercy, honor, glory; and the reprobate, represented by Esau, chosen by God for hatred, cruelty, wrath, destruction. Of all the people who had ever existed or ever would, only a precious few were God’s elect. Narrow is the way, which leadeth unto life, and few there be that find it. The vast majority, both of the living and of the dead, were created for destruction. For wide is the gate, and broad is the way, that leadeth to destruction, and many there be which go in thereat. My mother must have been through this story over and over ad nauseam through the years, but she spoke as if it were the first time, her tone filled with impossible awe—as if she still couldn’t believe the elegance of this scenario, as if the beauty of this divine truth could come only from the mind of God Himself.
I was puzzled. My mother seemed elated at something that sounded so dreadfully unfair: that God would create these two brothers to give mercy to one and cruelty to the other, when they had done nothing to deserve either. Of course, it wasn’t the undeserved kindness that disturbed me—it was the hatred. Why would God make Esau for evil, and then send Esau to Hell for being evil? Wasn’t God Himself responsible? It seemed wrong to condemn Esau for doing what God created him to do. When I piped up from the backseat to say so, Mom was only too pleased to go on. I had posed just the objection that the Apostle Paul addresses in his own account of the story: Thou wilt say then unto me, Why doth [God] yet find fault? For who hath resisted his will? If we are what God created us to be, how could it be just for Him to punish us?
In modern parlance, Paul’s response to this question amounts to something like “Who the Hell are you, a wretched human being, to ask such a question?” That’s an answer I would have understood, but my mother quoted the apostle’s reply as given in the King James Version: Nay but, O man, who art thou that repliest against God? Shall the thing formed say to him that formed it, Why hast thou made me thus? Mom’s eyes met mine in the rearview mirror and I stared blankly. Searching for a way to help Bekah and me make sense of this conundrum, her eyes lit up as they fell to the dolls in our laps. “It would be like if those Barbies in your lap stood up and said, ‘Why did you dress me this way?!’” Mom would always laugh heartily when she described our reactions later: “Your eyes were as big as saucers, you two girls starin’ down at those Barbies like you were afraid they might actually get up and start talkin’ at you!” For decades, this would be my mother’s go-to illustration for those who dared question why God would design most of humanity for the express purpose of tormenting them in Hell for eternity. Our dolls demonstrated how patently ridiculous it was to presume to ask such a question.
Although I took my mother’s point about the Barbies’ insolence, a more pressing question had presented itself as she laughed at our bug-eyed response to her hypothetical: What about me? Was I a Jacob or an Esau? What about Bekah? What about Sam and Josh? How could we know? From the driver’s seat, Mom somberly explained that we couldn’t. That we wouldn’t know for sure until we all stood before God at the Judgment. Her words filled me with dread, calling forth a mental image of the whole world awaiting judgment at the feet of God, standing at rapt attention like an army of the damned—and me, standing among them. What could I do to avoid a ruinous outcome? Predestination, clearly, had not yet sunk into my little skull—of course, I could do nothing to change my fate if God had chosen me for Hell—but my mother understood my need for comfort. “It’s a good sign that you’re afraid,” she said. “It means that you care what God requires of you.” Come, ye children, hearken unto me: I will teach you the fear of the Lord.
Many more years and innumerable Bible studies would pass before I fully and practically appreciated the meaning of this doctrine—that a person’s goodness was a symptom of God’s love, the effect of it, and not the cause—but I soon found predestination an immediate and compelling motivator. Its power came from beauty and from terror, a confluence of two desires. There was the desire to be like Jacob, to be one of God’s jewels, with all the rarity, purity, and virtue that signified. And they shall be mine, saith the Lord of hosts, in that day when I make up my jewels; and I will spare them, as a man spareth his own son that serveth him. And then there was the abject fear of being like the despised Esau, before of old ordained to this condemnation. We were powerless to alter our destiny, but the surest sign we could have that we were one of God’s elect? Our obedience.
I came to love the clarity and simplicity of this idea, how directly the Scriptures connected obedience to goodness. It was even implicated in God’s commandment to “love thy neighbor.” Thou shalt not hate thy brother in thine heart: thou shalt in any wise rebuke thy neighbour, and not suffer sin upon him. Thou shalt not avenge, nor bear any grudge against the children of thy people, but thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. The context made it abundantly clear to us that to love our neighbor was to rebuke him, to warn him away from the sins that would result in punishment from God. If we failed to do so, the blood of the wicked would be on our hands. When I say unto the wicked, Thou shalt surely die; and thou givest him not warning, nor speakest to warn the wicked from his wicked way, to save his life; the same wicked man shall die in his iniquity; but his blood will I require at thine hand.
We had taken to the streets because we had a solemn duty to obey God and to plead with our neighbors to do the same. It didn’t matter that the world hated the message. It didn’t matter that it required vast amounts of our time, money, energy, resources. This was what God required of His elect.
Whatever it cost us, we would pay.

While our daily protests were an explosion of overt hostility between my family and the city, school was a subtler matter. The decision to send us to public school was due primarily to practical considerations: the adults needed to work in order to support their growing families and the church, which refused all (exceedingly rare) donations from nonmembers. But once it became clear that our protests would continue for years and decades to come, the elders came to a few additional conclusions. First, that our presence in public school classrooms was a testimony against the people of Topeka: though they accused us of being hateful, we were polite, friendly, well-behaved, and accomplished students. Having your conversation honest among the Gentiles: that, whereas they speak against you as evildoers, they may by your good works, which they shall behold, glorify God in the day of visitation. Our parents described us as “walking picket signs.” They also weren’t especially afraid that we would be unduly influenced by our peers or teachers, that we might be persuaded to doubt or question Westboro’s teachings. The intensity of our daily religious education at home was a bulwark against such heresies.
Plus, they were in possession of divine truth. They weren’t afraid of questions, because they had all the answers.
For my part, school seemed to be an elaborate play where each of the actors—teachers, classmates, parents—pretended not to notice that we were on opposite sides of an epic, spiritual battle between good and evil. It was a tenuous truce that relied heavily on the First Amendment: no matter how much they disagreed with us or how often we picketed their churches, teachers were agents of government and barred from punishing us for our religious activities. But more, it relied on mutual consent to keep up the pretense—our shared willingness not to speak, for instance, of the nine-foot-tall picket sign that called out the citizenry as TOPEKA: A CITY OF WHORES at pickets after school.
It wasn’t easy for me to separate my life at the elementary school from the rest of my existence, and I had to learn that skill the hard way. One day in first grade, I tried to deepen my friendship with a classmate, Megan G., by taking her into my confidence during recess. Cupping my hands around my mouth and leaning in close, I whispered into her ear that our music teacher was “a fag” and not to be trusted. When I’d heard this warning from my mother at home, I’d thought of Mrs. Epoch’s dark hair and dark eyes and plump figure and began imagining her as the menacing witch from one of the fairy tales Dad sometimes performed for us before bed, Hansel and Gretel. Plus, she was Jewish! I thought Megan G. should know to be careful, but she, duly horrified, tattled immediately, and I was hauled into the principal’s office, sobbing in shame. My mom took me aside that night to help me understand, and I knew that she was right when she told me about these people. “Every single thing you do reflects on this church. These people don’t care about you! They wouldn’t think twice about hurting you in order to hurt the church! More than anyone else, our behavior has to be above reproach. School is not the time or the place for this discussion. You’re there to learn.” Thenceforth, I kept my standard postscript (“PS: God hates fags!”) out of notes passed to my cousins and confined to the diary I locked with a tiny metal key.
Despite the knowledge that I couldn’t trust my teachers or classmates with anything but pleasantries, I adored school. My sister Bekah could be relied upon to regularly chase the van down Arnold Street after our mom dropped us off in the morning, begging Mom to take her home, but I could never understand why. There were no chores at school, no crying babies, no laundry, no vacuuming. We only had to learn. It was the freest time we had, and became the portal to my favorite place: books. Once I mastered reading, my nose was always stuck in one: under the table at dinner, pushing kids on the swing set out back, or hiding in the stairwell (close at hand but out of sight, so I was less likely to be called on for errands). Mom or Dad or Sam would take us to the Topeka Public Library, and Josh and I would load ourselves down with armfuls. And when the library began a new service that let us request books to be sent to us by mail—for free? “Katie, bar the door,” Mom said.
My literary choices were heavily influenced by Josh’s penchant for science fiction—R. L. Stine’s Goosebumps and Fear Street series, Christopher Pike’s The Last Vampire, the Animorphs books by K. A. Applegate, and once I hit third grade, anything written by Stephen King. We had wide latitude in our consumption of books, television, film, and music, and for much the same reason that we attended public schools: our parents weren’t particularly worried about negative influences slipping into our minds undetected. They’d prepared us too well for that, and our response to depictions of sinful behavior was instinctive. Whore. Criminal. Adulterer. When fundamentalists would approach us and tout their decision to rid their homes of television and secular music, our response was chastisement. “How can you preach against the abominable teachings that litter the landscape of this nation if you don’t even know what they are?” my mom would admonish. I cherished the time I spent peering into alternate realities, and each day I’d race through my schoolwork so that I could escape into them: worlds where I had no responsibilities and lives that bore no resemblance whatsoever to my own.
In truth, school itself became an escape for me—an escape from Mom and the frequent eruptions of her caustic temper. This was a fact that I acknowledged to myself uneasily, with a deep awareness of how foolish, how melodramatic I was being. I had a good life, I was always told. The best life, one filled with people who loved God and hated evil and would teach me the truth about the world, unlike my misfortunate classmates. Still, I couldn’t deny the relief I felt when we’d finally pile into the van at the end of the often-nightmarish period between waking and school. It was nearly impossible to get through those two hours without a meltdown of some kind, without at least one of us at the other end of Mom’s razor tongue or even the big paddle—a three-foot-long, one-and-a-half-inch dowel rod she’d started using on me in second grade, when I’d spent fifteen seconds admiring a cousin’s gingerbread house after school instead of coming straight to the van (my delay forced her to hold up traffic on the narrow street in front of the school). The expectation of total obedience may have been the same in every Westboro family, but no one exacted it as vigorously, tenaciously, or continuously as my mother. I harbored few desires stronger than the one for her approval, but her standards seemed always to be shifting, tightening like a noose until I felt choked with the futility of my own rage.
I wasn’t the only one. Just sixteen months apart, little Bekah and I were sworn enemies all through grade school, engaging in sisterly combat at every opportunity. On one particularly explosive morning when I was eight or nine, she and I got two beatings each—for fighting, and for insufficient progress on our piano lessons—and they were bad. They were the sort that left big red welts, the kind that would bloom into bruises of blue and purple and black and finally yellow as I examined them before my bath each night. The blueness of a wound cleanseth away evil. Chasten thy son while there is hope, and let not thy soul spare for his crying. After the beatings that morning, I was the first to make my way to the van for school, relieved to be getting out of the house and away from the immediate danger, but my sister was furious. Bekah was a matchstick of a girl, yet what she lacked in size she made up for in the force of her temper—and that day it was directed at our mom.
When Bekah slammed the van door behind her, waiting for Mom to climb in and take us to school, her pixie face was a bright red splotch. She clenched her jaw, teeth grinding, and erupted: “I’m going to tell my teacher about this! FUCK. HER!” She let out a wild, wordless scream with all the rage her runty self could muster. Mom came out the door and down the steps a moment later.
I wanted Bekah to tell. I was petrified Bekah would tell. I envisioned a black and white police car pulling up to our driveway to take us away from Mom and Dad, and my heart surged, clutching for them. No one made hot chocolate like Mom, who was always standing over the stove singing and stirring a pot full of it when we came back from sledding the big hill at Quinton Heights. And no one could do bedtime like Dad, pretending to be a helicopter as he cradled us in his arms, vroom-vrooming us one at a time from the living room, up the stairs, around the big banister, and down the hall to our rooms for bedtime stories that always ended in tickle fests.
And then I imagined the cops themselves in our driveway—the same cops we serenaded with accusations of “corpulent coward!,” the same cops who let those big oafs punch and choke us on the picket line. I knew what I had to do. We only made it a few blocks on the way to school before I told Mom of Bekah’s threat, even though I was terrified of what Mom would do to her for it.
“DO YOU REALLY THINK THE LORD IS GOING TO LET YOU SABOTAGE US?”
My face flushed hot and I felt sick as I watched the van pull away from the school with Bekah still in it. I wouldn’t have wished Mom’s unbridled fury on anyone, not even my sister-nemesis—but I had to protect us. These people were evil. No one outside of Westboro cared about us. They were always and only after the church. Everything always came back to that.

Westboro Baptist Church sat on a quiet street lined with trees and ranch-style homes, many of which belonged to my aunts, uncles, and cousins. An eight-foot-tall stockade fence ran around the block’s perimeter, enclosing our common backyard and cutting inward to exclude the two houses that didn’t belong to church members. The whole setup had led many a contemptuous reporter to call our block a “compound”—implying some sort of spooky, David Koresh–style cult scenario—but my mother always cut them off when they spoke in such terms. The fence was originally built when the pool was put in, she’d tell them, back in the seventies. “You’re talkin’ to a bunch of lawyers,” she would chide, “and that pool is called an ‘attractive nuisance’ in the law. If that fence weren’t there, and some child wandered over off the street and fell in, we would be liable for that. It’s that simple.” People were always acting like we were crazy, like there must be some sort of nefarious scheme being hatched and meticulously cultivated behind our fences at every moment, but “we’re just people!” Mom would insist.
Unless you counted the various plots hatched by quarreling children, the block had never been a place for nefarious schemes. It was a place for us—for pool parties and trampoline jumping and tennis playing in the summer, and for football and snowball fights and sledding down the little hill behind our garage in the winter. It’s where I’d sit on the white porch swing with the big canopy, rocking gently with a paperback and a baby sibling propped in the crook of my left arm, the perfect excuse to sit and read for as long as it took Mom to realize that the baby had fallen asleep and tell me to come inside and put him down so I could help clean the kitchen or do the laundry, of which there was no end. It’s where Dad had taught us how to ride bikes and play croquet when we were kids. He and the uncles had even built us a BigToy when I was about three, with a rope bridge, scratchy wooden monkey bars that always gave me splinters, and, at the end of the big blue slide, a sandbox we’d once forgotten Isaiah in when he was a toddler. Mom had driven a van full of us noisy kids all the way to the family law office before we realized he wasn’t in his car seat—and then sped home only to find him busily digging away with his plastic shovel, safe and blessedly unaware of any drama.
More and more as the years had passed, I’d come to see our block in just that way: safe, secure, shielded from anything bad that could possibly happen. A refuge. Here there were no counterprotesters to steal our picket signs, no angry passersby to drive their cars at us, no jackboot cops to threaten arrest, and no one around to yell at us except our relatives. Here there was just same: heat and sticky humidity, the scent of newly mown grass, the insistent buzzing of cicadas, and kids biking around the track I’d been walking laps on since my legs were too stubby to keep up with Mom and her power-walking sisters. The familiarity of the scene could be like a sedative, and there were times when I’d be hurrying out our back door and just stop in my tracks, staring out into that wide-open space, stalled by the sense of comfort and calm that washed over me.
I felt that calm on the Sunday of my baptism, too.
Among the many mainstream religious traditions condemned by Westboro Baptist Church, infant baptism was a particular iniquity. Without any hint of hyperbole my grandfather likened it to burning the child alive in sacrifice to a pagan god. Only believers could be baptized in our church, following the examples of the adults baptized in the New Testament. The Ethiopian eunuch professed his belief before he was baptized, as infants cannot. The masses baptized by John the Baptist confessed their sins, as infants cannot. Even Jesus Christ Himself was baptized as an adult. Baptism, then, was not a rite of passage at Westboro. It would only take place if a believer felt called to ask for it, if they believed that they were one of God’s elect—a Jacob, and not an Esau. They would have to show evidence of an “orderly walk,” obedience to the standards held by the church, and active, eager participation in the work of the church. A candidate for baptism must speak with every member of the church, and may only be baptized if all members respond with silence when the question is posed: Can any forbid water?
When I turned thirteen and asked to be baptized, no one forbade me. My mother would be the first to tell you that I could be as willful and goofy as any thirteen-year-old girl, but she kept me on a tight leash, and I was learning. Earnest and enthusiastic about our beliefs, I zealously pursued the Bible knowledge needed to “defend them against all comers,” as Gramps instructed. Eight years on the picket line had convinced me that there was nothing in the world of greater significance than this battle for the cause of God and truth, and I was ready to dedicate the rest of my life in service of it. I’d had a brief crisis of conscience that spring, when I’d been involved in the seventh-grade musical, and when I came out of it, I knew it was time to seek baptism. School had become a parallel culture to the one I inhabited at home, one that I had long since adapted to. I knew my classmates saw me as some sort of weird hybrid of a person: a friendly girl who enjoyed helping others with homework on the one hand, but a hateful religious fanatic who believed everyone was going to Hell on the other. I had friendly acquaintances, and, for the most part, we all compartmentalized my conduct during class from my existence outside of it. I rarely saw my peers outside of school, but in spending extracurricular time with them each day—sitting around joking about mean teachers, listening to music, doing homework together—I began to wonder: Were my classmates really as bad as I’d been taught?
The question lingered in the back of my mind for a time, but I batted it away as soon as I consciously acknowledged it. There were only two kinds of people in the world, and my classmates belonged firmly in the Esau category. They didn’t seem to know or care about the Bible. Their parents were divorced and remarried. And some of them were as good as committing fornication already, what with all the hand-holding and kissing they were doing in the hallways. They might be friendly to me, but these “friends” of mine were enemies of God—and therefore must be my enemies, as well. Do not I hate them, O Lord, that hate thee? and am not I grieved with those that rise up against thee? I hate them with perfect hatred: I count them mine enemies.
During the winter, baptisms were done in the baptismal font in the church sanctuary—essentially a large blue bathtub near the pulpit, typically hidden from view by peach-colored curtains. Summer baptisms took place in the in-ground pool. It was about fifty feet long and located just outside Westboro’s rear entrance. On the afternoon I was baptized, the congregation filed out into that communal space in the blinding noonday sun, and I joined them a moment later, after changing into a white T-shirt and cutoff jeans. In silence, we all clustered around the shallow end, waiting for my grandfather to emerge. Three black stripes were painted the length of the pool to identify lanes for lap swims, and when Gramps walked out in a red windbreaker suit and old Nikes, I followed him as he waded to the stripe in the center. When I was a child, he would stand in just this spot, lift me out of the water as if it cost him no effort at all, and toss me several feet for a big splash, to the place where the bottom of the pool slopes down to the deep end. And then Bekah. And then Josh. My cousins. Over and over we swam back to him, one after another after another.
Now he stood to my left and motioned for me to use both of my hands to take hold of his left wrist. He was nearly seventy now, with slight tremors in his hands. He began with a passage of Scripture: Know ye not, that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ were baptized into His death? Therefore we are buried with him by baptism into death; that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in newness of life. He spoke of my profession of faith, and that I’d given evidence of being one of God’s elect. “I baptize you, my sister…” he declared, but his conclusion was lost to me as he covered my nose and mouth with a white cloth, supported my shoulders with his right hand, and pressed me down into the water.

Five years later, on the morning of my high school graduation, my brother disappeared. Saturdays were as welcome in my house as they are anywhere, and that one—sunny, warm, breezy—seemed like the perfect start to summer.
Still in pajamas, I was the first of the sisters to slip into the kitchen, which was brightly lit and full of activity. Several of my younger brothers were seated on bar stools around the island, chattering, munching happily, and swiping bits from each other’s plates. At two, Luke was the youngest, and his face was deceptively cherubic: he was the one most likely to do the thieving and least likely to tolerate such insolence from anyone else. Mom was standing over the stove making breakfast—pancakes, maybe, or scrambled eggs—and singing a seventies pop song I’d only ever heard in her soprano. I heard the huge smile in her voice before I saw it, and when she turned, her eyes caught mine and then she was singing the love song to me, with exaggerated feeling and theatrics at full voice. I couldn’t help but laugh to see her in such high spirits, because this was one of the places my mom seemed perfectly in her element.
“Where is Josh?” she called over the din. “It’s getting late! Would one of you boys run down and wake him up?” My brothers tumbled over themselves to race down to Josh’s basement bedroom. Moments later, they were thundering back up the stairs, Jonah leading the pack.
“He’s not there! It’s all gone!” Jonah was seven and a little confused, but not worried. I wasn’t, either; bizarre declarations were par for the course in a family with eight brothers. My brow furrowed a little, and I looked to Mom, whose mouth was ajar.
“Would you—”
“I’ll go look,” I said, and headed for the stairs with three little brothers trailing. There were fourteen steps down, and with each one, more of the stripped basement came into view. The television was gone, and so was Josh’s beloved Xbox. The bookcase, too. No clothes or random knickknacks strewn about. It had been years since I could see this much of the blue carpet, and I wondered briefly if he’d cleared the place out for the carpet cleaners. Rounding the corner, I was reassured to see that the dresser was still there and the bed neatly made. He was probably just in the shower. The boys flung open the flimsy double doors of his closet, and time slowed down.
The shelves and racks were completely bare.
One of the boys suddenly thrust a white envelope he’d found into my face. “Go show it to Mom,” I said, waving him on. They all took off.
I checked the bathroom, just in case.

“Mom and Dad, I didn’t think I would ever be saying this…”
The letter was one page, single-spaced, Times New Roman font, size twelve, dated May 21, 2004. The day before. He must have left in the middle of the night. I knew that meant he was a coward, just like two uncles of ours who had left the family long before either of us was born. “Slunk away in the dark” is how it was usually put. It wasn’t often that Mom spoke of her four absentee siblings, but when she did, it was with an edge of disdain. She didn’t seem hurt by their loss, precisely, instead vacillating between a strident good-riddance attitude, an outraged how-dare-they sense of betrayal, and a but-for-the-grace-of-God-there-go-I pity. The stories I was told were copious, and they painted clear portraits of the defectors: Kathy, vain and whorish; Nate, a thief and criminally rebellious; Mark, an entitled manipulator; Dot, an idolatrous witch. As such, their reasons for leaving the church could never be valid—just paltry attempts to mask the fact that they were wretched creatures controlled by their lusts, dastardly, selfish, unable to hack it in the rough and tumble of the Wars of the Lord. The implication of these tales had always been abundantly clear: these deserters were not like us, and we were better off without them.
We all knew this, but my mother had never been the sort of parent to let a lesson—or anything, really—go unsaid. Still standing over the stove, she was only quiet for a moment after she read through the letter. All four little boys were clustered around her, hushed now, waiting to be told what was going on, where Josh’s stuff had gone. Her tone was sober, and there was finality and resignation in it: “They went out from us, but they were not of us.” She was quoting the Bible, I could tell, but this wasn’t a verse we’d focused on before—not in my memory—and I was as mystified as the boys.
I couldn’t pay attention anymore, though. My thoughts were racing. My nineteen-year-old brother had gone apostate. We’d been together since my birth precisely seventeen months after his, but I’d never see him again. I’d never speak to him again. He hadn’t said goodbye. Why did he leave? Where did he go? What was our family without him? I tried to imagine our house without his near-constant recitation of esoteric movie quotes, and failed. I tried to imagine our family “Sock War” game without him pelting me with pairs of striped kneesocks, and failed. I tried to imagine never again standing on the picket line discussing the philosophical questions raised by Stephen King novels, and failed. I knew that none of this was important, that his departure was the only thing that mattered. That he was just like Mark and Nate now, and that I should feel about Josh what Mom felt about her departed siblings. I didn’t, though. I couldn’t conjure an image of Josh that made him like our degenerate uncles, couldn’t exchange this new picture of him with the one I’d had just the day before, just that morning: my big brother, the one who taught me the cheats and secrets to Super Mario Brothers 3 on Nintendo, my verbal sparring partner and fellow bibliophile, lover of mashed potatoes and abuser of ketchup. It was impossible to reconcile these two narratives.
“Can I…?”
I reached for the letter, and Mom passed it over. I read through it once, and then again, hoping repetition would reveal why he’d done this drastic thing. He had a wide array of complaints—rejections of everything from the church’s picketing ministry to the way our parents ran our household—but at first, none of his grievances made any sense at all. I paused briefly and reconsidered: I could appreciate some of his grumblings, but none of them was a reason to leave the only known place in the world where God meets with His people. So what if babysitting our little brothers could be a miserable, thankless job? So what if he hadn’t been allowed to get an apartment? I’d been appalled that he’d even asked, frankly. He was only nineteen! We were supposed to be at home, taking care of things there.
There was one part, though, that I simply couldn’t fathom.
“We picket these people and they hate us for it and I have had enough of it.”
I shook my head as my eyes traced that line again and again. I knew there were some difficult parts of the life we’d been living, but being reviled wasn’t one of them. The fact that people hated us was cause for great happiness. Jesus Himself said so: Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely, for my sake. Rejoice, and be exceeding glad: for great is your reward in heaven: for so persecuted they the prophets which were before you. Gramps always said from the pulpit that “rejoice” meant “leap for joy.”
Dismayed, I set the letter down on the counter. Maybe Josh really was a coward.
Mom made an announcement on the intercom, and speakers built into walls all over the house rang with her voice calling the family to the living room. I made my way there, and stared at Josh’s vacant seat while we waited for the stragglers. Since I had been a child, this was the place where we’d convened as a family at least once a day to read the Bible, talk through family matters, and discuss the church’s interpretation of current events. This was how my parents kept our household of twelve—eleven, I mentally corrected myself (Sam having moved out a few years earlier)—on the same page, united, working toward common goals. The couches were hunter green with tiny flowers printed on them, and they were arranged in one big rectangle, an invitation and a signal that each of us should be participating in these discussions.
My parents were sitting at their end of the rectangle, and when everyone was in place, Mom began with the passage she had quoted earlier from First John. “They went out from us, but they were not of us; for if they had been of us, they would no doubt have continued with us: but they went out, that they might be made manifest that they were not all of us. Don’t you see, children? Josh was here, but he was never of us. We have a promise right here—that if he were of us, he would have continued here with us. ‘No doubt’! But he did not. He’s come to years, and he’s decided that he is not going to serve God in truth. Flip over to Hebrews 10.”
The older ones of us opened our Bibles to the book of Hebrews. We’d memorized chapter ten during a recent summer, including a particularly terrifying meditation on the fate of those who leave the faith. It was full of the promised vengeance of God, of judgment and fiery indignation, and a grave warning: It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God. The chapter ends thusly:
But we are not of them who draw back unto perdition; but of them that believe to the saving of the soul.
We are not of them. Long ago, I had dedicated my life to serving God and His people, and I would not be like Josh and draw back. I would not follow him to destruction.
They are not of us. I comforted myself with these words, searching for every distinction I could find, for any shred of evidence that would distinguish me from my Judas of a brother. Josh was wicked, a coward. He wanted the praise of the world, he’d said so himself. He had denied Jesus, trodden underfoot the son of God. No, I was not like Josh. My heart was fixed.
I will never leave this place.

A steady stream of visitors poured into our house throughout the day, church members coming to affirm our righteousness and my brother’s wickedness. Their bitter demonization of him began almost instantly, so quickly that I had to fight hard against my instinct to defend him. On the picket line that afternoon, I listened as my cousins referred to Josh as a “punk” and a “little bitch” and a dozen other insulting names. We were planted on the sidewalk in front of the Kansas Expocentre, picketing my graduation ceremony before I headed inside to get my diploma—and though it was still a little strange when my two separate worlds collided, the context of the protest barely registered. My brother was gone, and it was disquieting to think of how my loved ones would have spoken of him just the day before, the same tender, loving words they were now using to describe those of us who remained. I furrowed my brow and stayed quiet. I trusted their judgment far more than my own.
The following day, our family vacation to Colorado went on in Josh’s absence. The nine-hour drive would be filled with tears both going and coming—even from my dad, the only time I can ever remember seeing him cry. But from the moment we returned to Topeka one week later, our tears were no longer acceptable. “We’re gonna make the Lord mad at us if we keep this up,” my mother warned sharply when she came upon me in tears the day after we got home. “This is from the Lord. We must be thankful and praise Him for all things, not just what seems good to us. We have to be in charge of our spirits. You hear me?”
My mother’s words were shades of a sign that would come many years later—GOD HATES YOUR FEELINGS—and correlated perfectly with a passage she called upon often: Casting down imaginations … and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ. We were to bring every thought into control and obedience to God, and our mom was going to help us get there.
With great effort I stifled my tears for Josh, but I couldn’t stop thinking about him. For years, Josh and I had been comrades in discontent, united by the bitterness we felt at the way our mother often treated us—her wavering between incredible kindness and unjustified cruelty. She could be so very abrasive, provoked into a fit of rage by the smallest infractions: a flash of anger across our face, an edge in our voice, any sign of hesitation or displeasure at what was being required of us. These were unmistakable signs of rebellion that she simply could not abide, and her lack of patience for our wayward emotions was one of the great hallmarks of our upbringing. But over time, I’d come to see things differently, in a way that Josh had never seemed to. I understood our mother’s hardness to be a painful necessity, not unlike our picketing: an expression of love manifesting as a harsh warning against sinful behavior. That was her duty as a mother.
It was a hard-won perspective, one that I had arrived at only after years of battling with my mom and with myself—but all the while, Josh’s heart had apparently been drawn further and further away. Take heed, brethren, lest there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief, in departing from the living God. He was an Esau, our enemy, doomed to eternal destruction. I felt so sorry for him, and so grateful to have been spared. As Josh and I had walked through the years of our teenage rebellion, he had missed the lesson that had become so clear to me: that happiness came only through submission—to the people and the circumstances and the limits that God had set for my life. The bounds of my habitation.
With that realization had come a peace with my mom that I had never thought possible. Just a few weeks before we lost Josh, she and I had walked in lockstep one afternoon, arm in arm like the close confidantes we had become. We were picking up Gabe and Jonah from the elementary school—the same one I had escaped to as a child. The spring sun was so warm on my face and the world was green and coming to life again, and I felt such a surge of joy and gratitude for my place in it that I started to cry. “Oh, what is it, sweet pea?” Mom asked, rubbing my arm soothingly with her free hand.
“I’m just so content,” I sobbed, clinging to her. “So happy and so grateful and so content. I don’t ever want that to change. I’m so afraid that it will. I don’t ever want the Lord to be mad at me for being ungrateful for my lot. I want to always love this life.”
My mother shushed me reassuringly. “The Lord has blessed you with so many wonderful talents, and you use them to serve Him. But more importantly, He’s given you a heart to know Him, and to love Him, and to love and serve His people. All we can do is trust Him and keep doing what He’s put in front of us to do.”
I pushed my sunglasses up and brushed the tears away.
“I love you, little girl.”




